Late that evening, I was surprised at my lodgings by a visit from Mr.
Bruff.

There was a noticeable change in the lawyer’s manner. It had lost its
usual confidence and spirit. He shook hands with me, for the first time
in his life, in silence.

“Are you going back to Hampstead?” I asked, by way of saying something.

“I have just left Hampstead,” he answered. “I know, Mr. Franklin, that
you have got at the truth at last. But, I tell you plainly, if I could
have foreseen the price that was to be paid for it, I should have
preferred leaving you in the dark.”

“You have seen Rachel?”

“I have come here after taking her back to Portland Place; it was
impossible to let her return in the carriage by herself. I can hardly
hold you responsible—considering that you saw her in my house and by my
permission—for the shock that this unlucky interview has inflicted on
her. All I can do is to provide against a repetition of the mischief.
She is young—she has a resolute spirit—she will get over this, with
time and rest to help her. I want to be assured that you will do
nothing to hinder her recovery. May I depend on your making no second
attempt to see her—except with my sanction and approval?”

“After what she has suffered, and after what I have suffered,” I said,
“you may rely on me.”

“I have your promise?”

“You have my promise.”

Mr. Bruff looked relieved. He put down his hat, and drew his chair
nearer to mine.

“That’s settled!” he said. “Now, about the future—_your_ future, I
mean. To my mind, the result of the extraordinary turn which the matter
has now taken is briefly this. In the first place, we are sure that
Rachel has told you the whole truth, as plainly as words can tell it.
In the second place—though we know that there must be some dreadful
mistake somewhere—we can hardly blame her for believing you to be
guilty, on the evidence of her own senses; backed, as that evidence has
been, by circumstances which appear, on the face of them, to tell dead
against you.”

There I interposed. “I don’t blame Rachel,” I said. “I only regret that
she could not prevail on herself to speak more plainly to me at the
time.”

“You might as well regret that Rachel is not somebody else,” rejoined
Mr. Bruff. “And even then, I doubt if a girl of any delicacy, whose
heart had been set on marrying you, could have brought herself to
charge you to your face with being a thief. Anyhow, it was not in
Rachel’s nature to do it. In a very different matter to this matter of
yours—which placed her, however, in a position not altogether unlike
her position towards you—I happen to know that she was influenced by a
similar motive to the motive which actuated her conduct in your case.
Besides, as she told me herself, on our way to town this evening, if
she _had_ spoken plainly, she would no more have believed your denial
then than she believes it now. What answer can you make to that? There
is no answer to be made to it. Come, come, Mr. Franklin! my view of the
case has been proved to be all wrong, I admit—but, as things are now,
my advice may be worth having for all that. I tell you plainly, we
shall be wasting our time, and cudgelling our brains to no purpose, if
we attempt to try back, and unravel this frightful complication from
the beginning. Let us close our minds resolutely to all that happened
last year at Lady Verinder’s country house; and let us look to what we
_can_ discover in the future, instead of to what we can _not_ discover
in the past.”

“Surely you forget,” I said, “that the whole thing is essentially a
matter of the past—so far as I am concerned?”

“Answer me this,” retorted Mr. Bruff. “Is the Moonstone at the bottom
of all the mischief—or is it not?”

“It is—of course.”

“Very good. What do we believe was done with the Moonstone, when it was
taken to London?”

“It was pledged to Mr. Luker.”

“We know that you are not the person who pledged it. Do we know who
did?”

“No.”

“Where do we believe the Moonstone to be now?”

“Deposited in the keeping of Mr. Luker’s bankers.”

“Exactly. Now observe. We are already in the month of June. Towards the
end of the month (I can’t be particular to a day) a year will have
elapsed from the time when we believe the jewel to have been pledged.
There is a chance—to say the least—that the person who pawned it, may
be prepared to redeem it when the year’s time has expired. If he
redeems it, Mr. Luker must himself—according to the terms of his own
arrangement—take the Diamond out of his banker’s hands. Under these
circumstances, I propose setting a watch at the bank, as the present
month draws to an end, and discovering who the person is to whom Mr.
Luker restores the Moonstone. Do you see it now?”

I admitted (a little unwillingly) that the idea was a new one, at any
rate.

“It’s Mr. Murthwaite’s idea quite as much as mine,” said Mr. Bruff. “It
might have never entered my head, but for a conversation we had
together some time since. If Mr. Murthwaite is right, the Indians are
likely to be on the lookout at the bank, towards the end of the month
too—and something serious may come of it. What comes of it doesn’t
matter to you and me except as it may help us to lay our hands on the
mysterious Somebody who pawned the Diamond. That person, you may rely
on it, is responsible (I don’t pretend to know how) for the position in
which you stand at this moment; and that person alone can set you right
in Rachel’s estimation.”

“I can’t deny,” I said, “that the plan you propose meets the difficulty
in a way that is very daring, and very ingenious, and very new. But——”

“But you have an objection to make?”

“Yes. My objection is, that your proposal obliges us to wait.”

“Granted. As I reckon the time, it requires you to wait about a
fortnight—more or less. Is that so very long?”

“It’s a life-time, Mr. Bruff, in such a situation as mine. My existence
will be simply unendurable to me, unless I do something towards
clearing my character at once.”

“Well, well, I understand that. Have you thought yet of what you can
do?”

“I have thought of consulting Sergeant Cuff.”

“He has retired from the police. It’s useless to expect the Sergeant to
help you.”

“I know where to find him; and I can but try.”

“Try,” said Mr. Bruff, after a moment’s consideration. “The case has
assumed such an extraordinary aspect since Sergeant Cuff’s time, that
you _may_ revive his interest in the inquiry. Try, and let me hear the
result. In the meanwhile,” he continued, rising, “if you make no
discoveries between this, and the end of the month, am I free to try,
on my side, what can be done by keeping a lookout at the bank?”

“Certainly,” I answered—“unless I relieve you of all necessity for
trying the experiment in the interval.”

Mr. Bruff smiled, and took up his hat.

“Tell Sergeant Cuff,” he rejoined, “that _I_ say the discovery of the
truth depends on the discovery of the person who pawned the Diamond.
And let me hear what the Sergeant’s experience says to that.”

So we parted.

Early the next morning, I set forth for the little town of Dorking—the
place of Sergeant Cuff’s retirement, as indicated to me by Betteredge.

Inquiring at the hotel, I received the necessary directions for finding
the Sergeant’s cottage. It was approached by a quiet bye-road, a little
way out of the town, and it stood snugly in the middle of its own plot
of garden ground, protected by a good brick wall at the back and the
sides, and by a high quickset hedge in front. The gate, ornamented at
the upper part by smartly-painted trellis-work, was locked. After
ringing at the bell, I peered through the trellis-work, and saw the
great Cuff’s favourite flower everywhere; blooming in his garden,
clustering over his door, looking in at his windows. Far from the
crimes and the mysteries of the great city, the illustrious thief-taker
was placidly living out the last Sybarite years of his life, smothered
in roses!

A decent elderly woman opened the gate to me, and at once annihilated
all the hopes I had built on securing the assistance of Sergeant Cuff.
He had started, only the day before, on a journey to Ireland.

“Has he gone there on business?” I asked.

The woman smiled. “He has only one business now, sir,” she said; “and
that’s roses. Some great man’s gardener in Ireland has found out
something new in the growing of roses—and Mr. Cuff’s away to inquire
into it.”

“Do you know when he will be back?”

“It’s quite uncertain, sir. Mr. Cuff said he should come back directly,
or be away some time, just according as he found the new discovery
worth nothing, or worth looking into. If you have any message to leave
for him, I’ll take care, sir, that he gets it.”

I gave her my card, having first written on it in pencil: “I have
something to say about the Moonstone. Let me hear from you as soon as
you get back.” That done, there was nothing left but to submit to
circumstances, and return to London.

In the irritable condition of my mind, at the time of which I am now
writing, the abortive result of my journey to the Sergeant’s cottage
simply aggravated the restless impulse in me to be doing something. On
the day of my return from Dorking, I determined that the next morning
should find me bent on a new effort at forcing my way, through all
obstacles, from the darkness to the light.

What form was my next experiment to take?

If the excellent Betteredge had been present while I was considering
that question, and if he had been let into the secret of my thoughts,
he would, no doubt, have declared that the German side of me was, on
this occasion, my uppermost side. To speak seriously, it is perhaps
possible that my German training was in some degree responsible for the
labyrinth of useless speculations in which I now involved myself. For
the greater part of the night, I sat smoking, and building up theories,
one more profoundly improbable than another. When I did get to sleep,
my waking fancies pursued me in dreams. I rose the next morning, with
Objective-Subjective and Subjective-Objective inextricably entangled
together in my mind; and I began the day which was to witness my next
effort at practical action of some kind, by doubting whether I had any
sort of right (on purely philosophical grounds) to consider any sort of
thing (the Diamond included) as existing at all.

How long I might have remained lost in the mist of my own metaphysics,
if I had been left to extricate myself, it is impossible for me to say.
As the event proved, accident came to my rescue, and happily delivered
me. I happened to wear, that morning, the same coat which I had worn on
the day of my interview with Rachel. Searching for something else in
one of the pockets, I came upon a crumpled piece of paper, and, taking
it out, found Betteredge’s forgotten letter in my hand.

It seemed hard on my good old friend to leave him without a reply. I
went to my writing-table, and read his letter again.

A letter which has nothing of the slightest importance in it, is not
always an easy letter to answer. Betteredge’s present effort at
corresponding with me came within this category. Mr. Candy’s assistant,
otherwise Ezra Jennings, had told his master that he had seen me; and
Mr. Candy, in his turn, wanted to see me and say something to me, when
I was next in the neighbourhood of Frizinghall. What was to be said in
answer to that, which would be worth the paper it was written on? I sat
idly drawing likenesses from memory of Mr. Candy’s remarkable-looking
assistant, on the sheet of paper which I had vowed to dedicate to
Betteredge—until it suddenly occurred to me that here was the
irrepressible Ezra Jennings getting in my way again! I threw a dozen
portraits, at least, of the man with the piebald hair (the hair in
every case, remarkably like), into the waste-paper basket—and then and
there, wrote my answer to Betteredge. It was a perfectly commonplace
letter—but it had one excellent effect on me. The effort of writing a
few sentences, in plain English, completely cleared my mind of the
cloudy nonsense which had filled it since the previous day.

Devoting myself once more to the elucidation of the impenetrable puzzle
which my own position presented to me, I now tried to meet the
difficulty by investigating it from a plainly practical point of view.
The events of the memorable night being still unintelligible to me, I
looked a little farther back, and searched my memory of the earlier
hours of the birthday for any incident which might prove of some
assistance to me in finding the clue.

Had anything happened while Rachel and I were finishing the painted
door? or, later, when I rode over to Frizinghall? or afterwards, when I
went back with Godfrey Ablewhite and his sisters? or, later again, when
I put the Moonstone into Rachel’s hands? or, later still, when the
company came, and we all assembled round the dinner-table? My memory
disposed of that string of questions readily enough, until I came to
the last. Looking back at the social event of the birthday dinner, I
found myself brought to a standstill at the outset of the inquiry. I
was not even capable of accurately remembering the number of the guests
who had sat at the same table with me.

To feel myself completely at fault here, and to conclude, thereupon,
that the incidents of the dinner might especially repay the trouble of
investigating them, formed parts of the same mental process, in my
case. I believe other people, in a similar situation, would have
reasoned as I did. When the pursuit of our own interests causes us to
become objects of inquiry to ourselves, we are naturally suspicious of
what we don’t know. Once in possession of the names of the persons who
had been present at the dinner, I resolved—as a means of enriching the
deficient resources of my own memory—to appeal to the memory of the
rest of the guests; to write down all that they could recollect of the
social events of the birthday; and to test the result, thus obtained,
by the light of what had happened afterwards, when the company had left
the house.

This last and newest of my many contemplated experiments in the art of
inquiry—which Betteredge would probably have attributed to the
clear-headed, or French, side of me being uppermost for the moment—may
fairly claim record here, on its own merits. Unlikely as it may seem, I
had now actually groped my way to the root of the matter at last. All I
wanted was a hint to guide me in the right direction at starting.
Before another day had passed over my head, that hint was given me by
one of the company who had been present at the birthday feast!

With the plan of proceeding which I now had in view, it was first
necessary to possess the complete list of the guests. This I could
easily obtain from Gabriel Betteredge. I determined to go back to
Yorkshire on that day, and to begin my contemplated investigation the
next morning.

It was just too late to start by the train which left London before
noon. There was no alternative but to wait, nearly three hours, for the
departure of the next train. Was there anything I could do in London,
which might usefully occupy this interval of time?

My thoughts went back again obstinately to the birthday dinner.

Though I had forgotten the numbers, and, in many cases, the names of
the guests, I remembered readily enough that by far the larger
proportion of them came from Frizinghall, or from its neighbourhood.
But the larger proportion was not all. Some few of us were not regular
residents in the country. I myself was one of the few. Mr. Murthwaite
was another. Godfrey Ablewhite was a third. Mr. Bruff—no: I called to
mind that business had prevented Mr. Bruff from making one of the
party. Had any ladies been present, whose usual residence was in
London? I could only remember Miss Clack as coming within this latter
category. However, here were three of the guests, at any rate, whom it
was clearly advisable for me to see before I left town. I drove off at
once to Mr. Bruff’s office; not knowing the addresses of the persons of
whom I was in search, and thinking it probable that he might put me in
the way of finding them.

Mr. Bruff proved to be too busy to give me more than a minute of his
valuable time. In that minute, however, he contrived to dispose—in the
most discouraging manner—of all the questions I had to put to him.

In the first place, he considered my newly-discovered method of finding
a clue to the mystery as something too purely fanciful to be seriously
discussed. In the second, third, and fourth places, Mr. Murthwaite was
now on his way back to the scene of his past adventures; Miss Clack had
suffered losses, and had settled, from motives of economy, in France;
Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite might, or might not, be discoverable somewhere in
London. Suppose I inquired at his club? And suppose I excused Mr.
Bruff, if he went back to his business and wished me good morning?

The field of inquiry in London, being now so narrowed as only to
include the one necessity of discovering Godfrey’s address, I took the
lawyer’s hint, and drove to his club.

In the hall, I met with one of the members, who was an old friend of my
cousin’s, and who was also an acquaintance of my own. This gentleman,
after enlightening me on the subject of Godfrey’s address, told me of
two recent events in his life, which were of some importance in
themselves, and which had not previously reached my ears.

It appeared that Godfrey, far from being discouraged by Rachel’s
withdrawal from her engagement to him had made matrimonial advances
soon afterwards to another young lady, reputed to be a great heiress.
His suit had prospered, and his marriage had been considered as a
settled and certain thing. But, here again, the engagement had been
suddenly and unexpectedly broken off—owing, it was said, on this
occasion, to a serious difference of opinion between the bridegroom and
the lady’s father, on the question of settlements.

As some compensation for this second matrimonial disaster, Godfrey had
soon afterwards found himself the object of fond pecuniary remembrance,
on the part of one of his many admirers. A rich old lady—highly
respected at the Mothers’ Small-Clothes-Conversion-Society, and a great
friend of Miss Clack’s (to whom she left nothing but a mourning
ring)—had bequeathed to the admirable and meritorious Godfrey a legacy
of five thousand pounds. After receiving this handsome addition to his
own modest pecuniary resources, he had been heard to say that he felt
the necessity of getting a little respite from his charitable labours,
and that his doctor prescribed “a run on the Continent, as likely to be
productive of much future benefit to his health.” If I wanted to see
him, it would be advisable to lose no time in paying my contemplated
visit.

I went, then and there, to pay my visit.

The same fatality which had made me just one day too late in calling on
Sergeant Cuff, made me again one day too late in calling on Godfrey. He
had left London, on the previous morning, by the tidal train, for
Dover. He was to cross to Ostend; and his servant believed he was going
on to Brussels. The time of his return was rather uncertain; but I
might be sure he would be away at least three months.

I went back to my lodgings a little depressed in spirits. Three of the
guests at the birthday dinner—and those three all exceptionally
intelligent people—were out of my reach, at the very time when it was
most important to be able to communicate with them. My last hopes now
rested on Betteredge, and on the friends of the late Lady Verinder whom
I might still find living in the neighbourhood of Rachel’s country
house.

On this occasion, I travelled straight to Frizinghall—the town being
now the central point in my field of inquiry. I arrived too late in the
evening to be able to communicate with Betteredge. The next morning, I
sent a messenger with a letter, requesting him to join me at the hotel,
at his earliest convenience.

Having taken the precaution—partly to save time, partly to accommodate
Betteredge—of sending my messenger in a fly, I had a reasonable
prospect, if no delays occurred, of seeing the old man within less than
two hours from the time when I had sent for him. During this interval,
I arranged to employ myself in opening my contemplated inquiry, among
the guests present at the birthday dinner who were personally known to
me, and who were easily within my reach. These were my relatives, the
Ablewhites, and Mr. Candy. The doctor had expressed a special wish to
see me, and the doctor lived in the next street. So to Mr. Candy I went
first.

After what Betteredge had told me, I naturally anticipated finding
traces in the doctor’s face of the severe illness from which he had
suffered. But I was utterly unprepared for such a change as I saw in
him when he entered the room and shook hands with me. His eyes were
dim; his hair had turned completely grey; his face was wizen; his
figure had shrunk. I looked at the once lively, rattlepated, humorous
little doctor—associated in my remembrance with the perpetration of
incorrigible social indiscretions and innumerable boyish jokes—and I
saw nothing left of his former self, but the old tendency to vulgar
smartness in his dress. The man was a wreck; but his clothes and his
jewellery—in cruel mockery of the change in him—were as gay and as
gaudy as ever.

“I have often thought of you, Mr. Blake,” he said; “and I am heartily
glad to see you again at last. If there is anything I can do for you,
pray command my services, sir—pray command my services!”

He said those few commonplace words with needless hurry and eagerness,
and with a curiosity to know what had brought me to Yorkshire, which he
was perfectly—I might say childishly—incapable of concealing from
notice.

With the object that I had in view, I had of course foreseen the
necessity of entering into some sort of personal explanation, before I
could hope to interest people, mostly strangers to me, in doing their
best to assist my inquiry. On the journey to Frizinghall I had arranged
what my explanation was to be—and I seized the opportunity now offered
to me of trying the effect of it on Mr. Candy.

“I was in Yorkshire, the other day, and I am in Yorkshire again now, on
rather a romantic errand,” I said. “It is a matter, Mr. Candy, in which
the late Lady Verinder’s friends all took some interest. You remember
the mysterious loss of the Indian Diamond, now nearly a year since?
Circumstances have lately happened which lead to the hope that it may
yet be found—and I am interesting myself, as one of the family, in
recovering it. Among the obstacles in my way, there is the necessity of
collecting again all the evidence which was discovered at the time, and
more if possible. There are peculiarities in this case which make it
desirable to revive my recollection of everything that happened in the
house, on the evening of Miss Verinder’s birthday. And I venture to
appeal to her late mother’s friends who were present on that occasion,
to lend me the assistance of their memories——”

I had got as far as that in rehearsing my explanatory phrases, when I
was suddenly checked by seeing plainly in Mr. Candy’s face that my
experiment on him was a total failure.

The little doctor sat restlessly picking at the points of his fingers
all the time I was speaking. His dim watery eyes were fixed on my face
with an expression of vacant and wistful inquiry very painful to see.
What he was thinking of, it was impossible to divine. The one thing
clearly visible was that I had failed, after the first two or three
words, in fixing his attention. The only chance of recalling him to
himself appeared to lie in changing the subject. I tried a new topic
immediately.

“So much,” I said, gaily, “for what brings me to Frizinghall! Now, Mr.
Candy, it’s your turn. You sent me a message by Gabriel Betteredge——”

He left off picking at his fingers, and suddenly brightened up.

“Yes! yes! yes!” he exclaimed eagerly. “That’s it! I sent you a
message!”

“And Betteredge duly communicated it by letter,” I went on. “You had
something to say to me, the next time I was in your neighbourhood.
Well, Mr. Candy, here I am!”

“Here you are!” echoed the doctor. “And Betteredge was quite right. I
had something to say to you. That was my message. Betteredge is a
wonderful man. What a memory! At his age, what a memory!”

He dropped back into silence, and began picking at his fingers again.
Recollecting what I had heard from Betteredge about the effect of the
fever on his memory, I went on with the conversation, in the hope that
I might help him at starting.

“It’s a long time since we met,” I said. “We last saw each other at the
last birthday dinner my poor aunt was ever to give.”

“That’s it!” cried Mr. Candy. “The birthday dinner!” He started
impulsively to his feet, and looked at me. A deep flush suddenly
overspread his faded face, and he abruptly sat down again, as if
conscious of having betrayed a weakness which he would fain have
concealed. It was plain, pitiably plain, that he was aware of his own
defect of memory, and that he was bent on hiding it from the
observation of his friends.

Thus far he had appealed to my compassion only. But the words he had
just said—few as they were—roused my curiosity instantly to the highest
pitch. The birthday dinner had already become the one event in the
past, at which I looked back with strangely-mixed feelings of hope and
distrust. And here was the birthday dinner unmistakably proclaiming
itself as the subject on which Mr. Candy had something important to say
to me!

I attempted to help him out once more. But, this time, my own interests
were at the bottom of my compassionate motive, and they hurried me on a
little too abruptly, to the end I had in view.

“It’s nearly a year now,” I said, “since we sat at that pleasant table.
Have you made any memorandum—in your diary, or otherwise—of what you
wanted to say to me?”

Mr. Candy understood the suggestion, and showed me that he understood
it, as an insult.

“I require no memorandum, Mr. Blake,” he said, stiffly enough. “I am
not such a very old man, yet—and my memory (thank God) is to be
thoroughly depended on!”

It is needless to say that I declined to understand that he was
offended with me.

“I wish I could say the same of _my_ memory,” I answered. “When _I_ try
to think of matters that are a year old, I seldom find my remembrance
as vivid as I could wish it to be. Take the dinner at Lady Verinder’s,
for instance——”

Mr. Candy brightened up again, the moment the allusion passed my lips.

“Ah! the dinner, the dinner at Lady Verinder’s!” he exclaimed, more
eagerly than ever. “I have got something to say to you about that.”

His eyes looked at me again with the painful expression of inquiry, so
wistful, so vacant, so miserably helpless to see. He was evidently
trying hard, and trying in vain, to recover the lost recollection. “It
was a very pleasant dinner,” he burst out suddenly, with an air of
saying exactly what he wanted to say. “A very pleasant dinner, Mr.
Blake, wasn’t it?” He nodded and smiled, and appeared to think, poor
fellow, that he had succeeded in concealing the total failure of his
memory, by a well-timed exertion of his own presence of mind.

It was so distressing that I at once shifted the talk—deeply as I was
interested in his recovering the lost remembrance—to topics of local
interest.

Here, he got on glibly enough. Trumpery little scandals and quarrels in
the town, some of them as much as a month old, appeared to recur to his
memory readily. He chattered on, with something of the smooth gossiping
fluency of former times. But there were moments, even in the full flow
of his talkativeness, when he suddenly hesitated—looked at me for a
moment with the vacant inquiry once more in his eyes—controlled
himself—and went on again. I submitted patiently to my martyrdom (it is
surely nothing less than martyrdom to a man of cosmopolitan sympathies,
to absorb in silent resignation the news of a country town?) until the
clock on the chimney-piece told me that my visit had been prolonged
beyond half an hour. Having now some right to consider the sacrifice as
complete, I rose to take leave. As we shook hands, Mr. Candy reverted
to the birthday festival of his own accord.

“I am so glad we have met again,” he said. “I had it on my mind—I
really had it on my mind, Mr. Blake, to speak to you. About the dinner
at Lady Verinder’s, you know? A pleasant dinner—really a pleasant
dinner now, wasn’t it?”

On repeating the phrase, he seemed to feel hardly as certain of having
prevented me from suspecting his lapse of memory, as he had felt on the
first occasion. The wistful look clouded his face again: and, after
apparently designing to accompany me to the street door, he suddenly
changed his mind, rang the bell for the servant, and remained in the
drawing-room.

I went slowly down the doctor’s stairs, feeling the disheartening
conviction that he really had something to say which it was vitally
important to me to hear, and that he was morally incapable of saying
it. The effort of remembering that he wanted to speak to me was, but
too evidently, the only effort that his enfeebled memory was now able
to achieve.

Just as I reached the bottom of the stairs, and had turned a corner on
my way to the outer hall, a door opened softly somewhere on the ground
floor of the house, and a gentle voice said behind me:—

“I am afraid, sir, you find Mr. Candy sadly changed?”

I turned round, and found myself face to face with Ezra Jennings.