But few words are needed, on my part, to complete the narrative that
has been presented in the Journal of Ezra Jennings.

Of myself, I have only to say that I awoke on the morning of the
twenty-sixth, perfectly ignorant of all that I had said and done under
the influence of the opium—from the time when the drug first laid its
hold on me, to the time when I opened my eyes, in Rachel’s
sitting-room.

Of what happened after my waking, I do not feel called upon to render
an account in detail. Confining myself merely to results, I have to
report that Rachel and I thoroughly understood each other, before a
single word of explanation had passed on either side. I decline to
account, and Rachel declines to account, for the extraordinary rapidity
of our reconciliation. Sir and Madam, look back at the time when you
were passionately attached to each other—and you will know what
happened, after Ezra Jennings had shut the door of the sitting-room, as
well as I know it myself.

I have, however, no objection to add, that we should have been
certainly discovered by Mrs. Merridew, but for Rachel’s presence of
mind. She heard the sound of the old lady’s dress in the corridor, and
instantly ran out to meet her; I heard Mrs. Merridew say, “What is the
matter?” and I heard Rachel answer, “The explosion!” Mrs. Merridew
instantly permitted herself to be taken by the arm, and led into the
garden, out of the way of the impending shock. On her return to the
house, she met me in the hall, and expressed herself as greatly struck
by the vast improvement in Science, since the time when she was a girl
at school. “Explosions, Mr. Blake, are infinitely milder than they
were. I assure you, I barely heard Mr. Jennings’s explosion from the
garden. And no smell afterwards, that I can detect, now we have come
back to the house! I must really apologise to your medical friend. It
is only due to him to say that he has managed it beautifully!”

So, after vanquishing Betteredge and Mr. Bruff, Ezra Jennings
vanquished Mrs. Merridew herself. There is a great deal of undeveloped
liberal feeling in the world, after all!

At breakfast, Mr. Bruff made no secret of his reasons for wishing that
I should accompany him to London by the morning train. The watch kept
at the bank, and the result which might yet come of it, appealed so
irresistibly to Rachel’s curiosity, that she at once decided (if Mrs.
Merridew had no objection) on accompanying us back to town—so as to be
within reach of the earliest news of our proceedings.

Mrs. Merridew proved to be all pliability and indulgence, after the
truly considerate manner in which the explosion had conducted itself;
and Betteredge was accordingly informed that we were all four to travel
back together by the morning train. I fully expected that he would have
asked leave to accompany us. But Rachel had wisely provided her
faithful old servant with an occupation that interested him. He was
charged with completing the refurnishing of the house, and was too full
of his domestic responsibilities to feel the “detective-fever” as he
might have felt it under other circumstances.

Our one subject of regret, in going to London, was the necessity of
parting, more abruptly than we could have wished, with Ezra Jennings.
It was impossible to persuade him to accompany us. I could only promise
to write to him—and Rachel could only insist on his coming to see her
when she returned to Yorkshire. There was every prospect of our meeting
again in a few months—and yet there was something very sad in seeing
our best and dearest friend left standing alone on the platform, as the
train moved out of the station.

On our arrival in London, Mr. Bruff was accosted at the terminus by a
small boy, dressed in a jacket and trousers of threadbare black cloth,
and personally remarkable in virtue of the extraordinary prominence of
his eyes. They projected so far, and they rolled about so loosely, that
you wondered uneasily why they remained in their sockets. After
listening to the boy, Mr. Bruff asked the ladies whether they would
excuse our accompanying them back to Portland Place. I had barely time
to promise Rachel that I would return, and tell her everything that had
happened, before Mr. Bruff seized me by the arm, and hurried me into a
cab. The boy with the ill-secured eyes took his place on the box by the
driver, and the driver was directed to go to Lombard Street.

“News from the bank?” I asked, as we started.

“News of Mr. Luker,” said Mr. Bruff. “An hour ago, he was seen to leave
his house at Lambeth, in a cab, accompanied by two men, who were
recognised by _my_ men as police officers in plain clothes. If Mr.
Luker’s dread of the Indians is at the bottom of this precaution, the
inference is plain enough. He is going to take the Diamond out of the
bank.”

“And we are going to the bank to see what comes of it?”

“Yes—or to hear what has come of it, if it is all over by this time.
Did you notice my boy—on the box, there?”

“I noticed his eyes.”

Mr. Bruff laughed. “They call the poor little wretch ‘Gooseberry’ at
the office,” he said. “I employ him to go on errands—and I only wish my
clerks who have nick-named him were as thoroughly to be depended on as
he is. Gooseberry is one of the sharpest boys in London, Mr. Blake, in
spite of his eyes.”

It was twenty minutes to five when we drew up before the bank in
Lombard Street. Gooseberry looked longingly at his master, as he opened
the cab door.

“Do you want to come in too?” asked Mr. Bruff kindly. “Come in then,
and keep at my heels till further orders. He’s as quick as lightning,”
pursued Mr. Bruff, addressing me in a whisper. “Two words will do with
Gooseberry, where twenty would be wanted with another boy.”

We entered the bank. The outer office—with the long counter, behind
which the cashiers sat—was crowded with people; all waiting their turn
to take money out, or to pay money in, before the bank closed at five
o’clock.

Two men among the crowd approached Mr. Bruff, as soon as he showed
himself.

“Well,” asked the lawyer. “Have you seen him?”

“He passed us here half an hour since, sir, and went on into the inner
office.”

“Has he not come out again yet?”

“No, sir.”

Mr. Bruff turned to me. “Let us wait,” he said.

I looked round among the people about me for the three Indians. Not a
sign of them was to be seen anywhere. The only person present with a
noticeably dark complexion was a tall man in a pilot coat, and a round
hat, who looked like a sailor. Could this be one of them in disguise?
Impossible! The man was taller than any of the Indians; and his face,
where it was not hidden by a bushy black beard, was twice the breadth
of any of their faces at least.

“They must have their spy somewhere,” said Mr. Bruff, looking at the
dark sailor in his turn. “And he may be the man.”

Before he could say more, his coat-tail was respectfully pulled by his
attendant sprite with the gooseberry eyes. Mr. Bruff looked where the
boy was looking. “Hush!” he said. “Here is Mr. Luker!”

The money-lender came out from the inner regions of the bank, followed
by his two guardian policemen in plain clothes.

“Keep your eye on him,” whispered Mr. Bruff. “If he passes the Diamond
to anybody, he will pass it here.”

Without noticing either of us, Mr. Luker slowly made his way to the
door—now in the thickest, now in the thinnest part of the crowd. I
distinctly saw his hand move, as he passed a short, stout man,
respectably dressed in a suit of sober grey. The man started a little,
and looked after him. Mr. Luker moved on slowly through the crowd. At
the door his guard placed themselves on either side of him. They were
all three followed by one of Mr. Bruff’s men—and I saw them no more.

I looked round at the lawyer, and then looked significantly towards the
man in the suit of sober grey. “Yes!” whispered Mr. Bruff, “I saw it
too!” He turned about, in search of his second man. The second man was
nowhere to be seen. He looked behind him for his attendant sprite.
Gooseberry had disappeared.

“What the devil does it mean?” said Mr. Bruff angrily. “They have both
left us at the very time when we want them most.”

It came to the turn of the man in the grey suit to transact his
business at the counter. He paid in a cheque—received a receipt for
it—and turned to go out.

“What is to be done?” asked Mr. Bruff. “_We_ can’t degrade ourselves by
following him.”

“_I_ can!” I said. “I wouldn’t lose sight of that man for ten thousand
pounds!”

“In that case,” rejoined Mr. Bruff, “I wouldn’t lose sight of _you_,
for twice the money. A nice occupation for a man in my position,” he
muttered to himself, as we followed the stranger out of the bank. “For
Heaven’s sake don’t mention it. I should be ruined if it was known.”

The man in the grey suit got into an omnibus, going westward. We got in
after him. There were latent reserves of youth still left in Mr. Bruff.
I assert it positively—when he took his seat in the omnibus, he
blushed!

The man in the grey suit stopped the omnibus, and got out in Oxford
Street. We followed him again. He went into a chemist’s shop.

Mr. Bruff started. “My chemist!” he exclaimed. “I am afraid we have
made a mistake.”

We entered the shop. Mr. Bruff and the proprietor exchanged a few words
in private. The lawyer joined me again, with a very crestfallen face.

“It’s greatly to our credit,” he said, as he took my arm, and led me
out—“that’s one comfort!”

“What is to our credit?” I asked.

“Mr. Blake! you and I are the two worst amateur detectives that ever
tried their hands at the trade. The man in the grey suit has been
thirty years in the chemist’s service. He was sent to the bank to pay
money to his master’s account—and he knows no more of the Moonstone
than the babe unborn.”

I asked what was to be done next.

“Come back to my office,” said Mr. Bruff. “Gooseberry, and my second
man, have evidently followed somebody else. Let us hope that _they_ had
their eyes about them at any rate!”

When we reached Gray’s Inn Square, the second man had arrived there
before us. He had been waiting for more than a quarter of an hour.

“Well!” asked Mr. Bruff. “What’s your news?”

“I am sorry to say, sir,” replied the man, “that I have made a mistake.
I could have taken my oath that I saw Mr. Luker pass something to an
elderly gentleman, in a light-coloured paletot. The elderly gentleman
turns out, sir, to be a most respectable master iron-monger in
Eastcheap.”

“Where is Gooseberry?” asked Mr. Bruff resignedly.

The man stared. “I don’t know, sir. I have seen nothing of him since I
left the bank.”

Mr. Bruff dismissed the man. “One of two things,” he said to me.
“Either Gooseberry has run away, or he is hunting on his own account.
What do you say to dining here, on the chance that the boy may come
back in an hour or two? I have got some good wine in the cellar, and we
can get a chop from the coffee-house.”

We dined at Mr. Bruff’s chambers. Before the cloth was removed, “a
person” was announced as wanting to speak to the lawyer. Was the person
Gooseberry? No: only the man who had been employed to follow Mr. Luker
when he left the bank.

The report, in this case, presented no feature of the slightest
interest. Mr. Luker had gone back to his own house, and had there
dismissed his guard. He had not gone out again afterwards. Towards
dusk, the shutters had been put up, and the doors had been bolted. The
street before the house, and the alley behind the house, had been
carefully watched. No signs of the Indians had been visible. No person
whatever had been seen loitering about the premises. Having stated
these facts, the man waited to know whether there were any further
orders. Mr. Bruff dismissed him for the night.

“Do you think Mr. Luker has taken the Moonstone home with him?” I
asked.

“Not he,” said Mr. Bruff. “He would never have dismissed his two
policemen, if he had run the risk of keeping the Diamond in his own
house again.”

We waited another half-hour for the boy, and waited in vain. It was
then time for Mr. Bruff to go to Hampstead, and for me to return to
Rachel in Portland Place. I left my card, in charge of the porter at
the chambers, with a line written on it to say that I should be at my
lodgings at half past ten, that night. The card was to be given to the
boy, if the boy came back.

Some men have a knack of keeping appointments; and other men have a
knack of missing them. I am one of the other men. Add to this, that I
passed the evening at Portland Place, on the same seat with Rachel, in
a room forty feet long, with Mrs. Merridew at the further end of it.
Does anybody wonder that I got home at half past twelve instead of half
past ten? How thoroughly heartless that person must be! And how
earnestly I hope I may never make that person’s acquaintance!

My servant handed me a morsel of paper when he let me in.

I read, in a neat legal handwriting, these words—“If you please, sir, I
am getting sleepy. I will come back tomorrow morning, between nine and
ten.” Inquiry proved that a boy, with very extraordinary-looking eyes,
had called, and presented my card and message, had waited an hour, had
done nothing but fall asleep and wake up again, had written a line for
me, and had gone home—after gravely informing the servant that “he was
fit for nothing unless he got his night’s rest.”

At nine, the next morning, I was ready for my visitor. At half past
nine, I heard steps outside my door. “Come in, Gooseberry!” I called
out. “Thank you, sir,” answered a grave and melancholy voice. The door
opened. I started to my feet, and confronted—Sergeant Cuff!

“I thought I would look in here, Mr. Blake, on the chance of your being
in town, before I wrote to Yorkshire,” said the Sergeant.

He was as dreary and as lean as ever. His eyes had not lost their old
trick (so subtly noticed in Betteredge’s Narrative) of “looking as if
they expected something more from you than you were aware of yourself.”
But, so far as dress can alter a man, the great Cuff was changed beyond
all recognition. He wore a broad-brimmed white hat, a light shooting
jacket, white trousers, and drab gaiters. He carried a stout oak stick.
His whole aim and object seemed to be to look as if he had lived in the
country all his life. When I complimented him on his Metamorphosis, he
declined to take it as a joke. He complained, quite gravely, of the
noises and the smells of London. I declare I am far from sure that he
did not speak with a slightly rustic accent! I offered him breakfast.
The innocent countryman was quite shocked. _His_ breakfast hour was
half-past six—and _he_ went to bed with the cocks and hens!

“I only got back from Ireland last night,” said the Sergeant, coming
round to the practical object of his visit, in his own impenetrable
manner. “Before I went to bed, I read your letter, telling me what has
happened since my inquiry after the Diamond was suspended last year.
There’s only one thing to be said about the matter on my side. I
completely mistook my case. How any man living was to have seen things
in their true light, in such a situation as mine was at the time, I
don’t profess to know. But that doesn’t alter the facts as they stand.
I own that I made a mess of it. Not the first mess, Mr. Blake, which
has distinguished my professional career! It’s only in books that the
officers of the detective force are superior to the weakness of making
a mistake.”

“You have come in the nick of time to recover your reputation,” I said.

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Blake,” rejoined the Sergeant. “Now I have
retired from business, I don’t care a straw about my reputation. I have
done with my reputation, thank God! I am here, sir, in grateful
remembrance of the late Lady Verinder’s liberality to me. I will go
back to my old work—if you want me, and if you will trust me—on that
consideration, and on no other. Not a farthing of money is to pass, if
you please, from you to me. This is on honour. Now tell me, Mr. Blake,
how the case stands since you wrote to me last.”

I told him of the experiment with the opium, and of what had occurred
afterwards at the bank in Lombard Street. He was greatly struck by the
experiment—it was something entirely new in his experience. And he was
particularly interested in the theory of Ezra Jennings, relating to
what I had done with the Diamond, after I had left Rachel’s
sitting-room, on the birthday night.

“I don’t hold with Mr. Jennings that you hid the Moonstone,” said
Sergeant Cuff. “But I agree with him, that you must certainly have
taken it back to your own room.”

“Well?” I asked. “And what happened then?”

“Have you no suspicion yourself of what happened, sir?”

“None whatever.”

“Has Mr. Bruff no suspicion?”

“No more than I have.”

Sergeant Cuff rose, and went to my writing-table. He came back with a
sealed envelope. It was marked “Private;” it was addressed to me; and
it had the Sergeant’s signature in the corner.

“I suspected the wrong person, last year,” he said: “and I may be
suspecting the wrong person now. Wait to open the envelope, Mr. Blake,
till you have got at the truth. And then compare the name of the guilty
person, with the name that I have written in that sealed letter.”

I put the letter into my pocket—and then asked for the Sergeant’s
opinion of the measures which we had taken at the bank.

“Very well intended, sir,” he answered, “and quite the right thing to
do. But there was another person who ought to have been looked after
besides Mr. Luker.”

“The person named in the letter you have just given to me?”

“Yes, Mr. Blake, the person named in the letter. It can’t be helped
now. I shall have something to propose to you and Mr. Bruff, sir, when
the time comes. Let’s wait, first, and see if the boy has anything to
tell us that is worth hearing.”

It was close on ten o’clock, and the boy had not made his appearance.
Sergeant Cuff talked of other matters. He asked after his old friend
Betteredge, and his old enemy the gardener. In a minute more, he would
no doubt have got from this, to the subject of his favourite roses, if
my servant had not interrupted us by announcing that the boy was below.

On being brought into the room, Gooseberry stopped at the threshold of
the door, and looked distrustfully at the stranger who was in my
company. I told the boy to come to me.

“You may speak before this gentleman,” I said. “He is here to assist
me; and he knows all that has happened. Sergeant Cuff,” I added, “this
is the boy from Mr. Bruff’s office.”

In our modern system of civilisation, celebrity (no matter of what
kind) is the lever that will move anything. The fame of the great Cuff
had even reached the ears of the small Gooseberry. The boy’s ill-fixed
eyes rolled, when I mentioned the illustrious name, till I thought they
really must have dropped on the carpet.

“Come here, my lad,” said the Sergeant, “and let’s hear what you have
got to tell us.”

The notice of the great man—the hero of many a famous story in every
lawyer’s office in London—appeared to fascinate the boy. He placed
himself in front of Sergeant Cuff, and put his hands behind him, after
the approved fashion of a neophyte who is examined in his catechism.

“What is your name?” said the Sergeant, beginning with the first
question in the catechism.

“Octavius Guy,” answered the boy. “They call me Gooseberry at the
office because of my eyes.”

“Octavius Guy, otherwise Gooseberry,” pursued the Sergeant, with the
utmost gravity, “you were missed at the bank yesterday. What were you
about?”

“If you please, sir, I was following a man.”

“Who was he?”

“A tall man, sir, with a big black beard, dressed like a sailor.”

“I remember the man!” I broke in. “Mr. Bruff and I thought he was a spy
employed by the Indians.”

Sergeant Cuff did not appear to be much impressed by what Mr. Bruff and
I had thought. He went on catechising Gooseberry.

“Well?” he said—“and why did you follow the sailor?”

“If you please, sir, Mr. Bruff wanted to know whether Mr. Luker passed
anything to anybody on his way out of the bank. I saw Mr. Luker pass
something to the sailor with the black beard.”

“Why didn’t you tell Mr. Bruff what you saw?”

“I hadn’t time to tell anybody, sir, the sailor went out in such a
hurry.”

“And you ran out after him—eh?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Gooseberry,” said the Sergeant, patting his head, “you have got
something in that small skull of yours—and it isn’t cotton-wool. I am
greatly pleased with you, so far.”

The boy blushed with pleasure. Sergeant Cuff went on.

“Well? and what did the sailor do, when he got into the street?”

“He called a cab, sir.”

“And what did you do?”

“Held on behind, and run after it.”

Before the Sergeant could put his next question, another visitor was
announced—the head clerk from Mr. Bruff’s office.

Feeling the importance of not interrupting Sergeant Cuff’s examination
of the boy, I received the clerk in another room. He came with bad news
of his employer. The agitation and excitement of the last two days had
proved too much for Mr. Bruff. He had awoke that morning with an attack
of gout; he was confined to his room at Hampstead; and, in the present
critical condition of our affairs, he was very uneasy at being
compelled to leave me without the advice and assistance of an
experienced person. The chief clerk had received orders to hold himself
at my disposal, and was willing to do his best to replace Mr. Bruff.

I wrote at once to quiet the old gentleman’s mind, by telling him of
Sergeant Cuff’s visit: adding that Gooseberry was at that moment under
examination; and promising to inform Mr. Bruff, either personally, or
by letter, of whatever might occur later in the day. Having despatched
the clerk to Hampstead with my note, I returned to the room which I had
left, and found Sergeant Cuff at the fireplace, in the act of ringing
the bell.

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Blake,” said the Sergeant. “I was just going to
send word by your servant that I wanted to speak to you. There isn’t a
doubt on my mind that this boy—this most meritorious boy,” added the
Sergeant, patting Gooseberry on the head, “has followed the right man.
Precious time has been lost, sir, through your unfortunately not being
at home at half past ten last night. The only thing to do, now, is to
send for a cab immediately.”

In five minutes more, Sergeant Cuff and I (with Gooseberry on the box
to guide the driver) were on our way eastward, towards the City.

“One of these days,” said the Sergeant, pointing through the front
window of the cab, “that boy will do great things in my late
profession. He is the brightest and cleverest little chap I have met
with, for many a long year past. You shall hear the substance, Mr.
Blake, of what he told me while you were out of the room. You were
present, I think, when he mentioned that he held on behind the cab, and
ran after it?”

“Yes.”

“Well, sir, the cab went from Lombard Street to the Tower Wharf. The
sailor with the black beard got out, and spoke to the steward of the
Rotterdam steamboat, which was to start next morning. He asked if he
could be allowed to go on board at once, and sleep in his berth
over-night. The steward said, No. The cabins, and berths, and bedding
were all to have a thorough cleaning that evening, and no passenger
could be allowed to come on board, before the morning. The sailor
turned round, and left the wharf. When he got into the street again,
the boy noticed for the first time, a man dressed like a respectable
mechanic, walking on the opposite side of the road, and apparently
keeping the sailor in view. The sailor stopped at an eating-house in
the neighbourhood, and went in. The boy—not being able to make up his
mind, at the moment—hung about among some other boys, staring at the
good things in the eating-house window. He noticed the mechanic
waiting, as he himself was waiting—but still on the opposite side of
the street. After a minute, a cab came by slowly, and stopped where the
mechanic was standing. The boy could only see plainly one person in the
cab, who leaned forward at the window to speak to the mechanic. He
described that person, Mr. Blake, without any prompting from me, as
having a dark face, like the face of an Indian.”

It was plain, by this time, that Mr. Bruff and I had made another
mistake. The sailor with the black beard was clearly not a spy in the
service of the Indian conspiracy. Was he, by any possibility, the man
who had got the Diamond?

“After a little,” pursued the Sergeant, “the cab moved on slowly down
the street. The mechanic crossed the road, and went into the
eating-house. The boy waited outside till he was hungry and tired—and
then went into the eating-house, in his turn. He had a shilling in his
pocket; and he dined sumptuously, he tells me, on a black-pudding, an
eel-pie, and a bottle of ginger-beer. What can a boy _not_ digest? The
substance in question has never been found yet.”

“What did he see in the eating-house?” I asked.

“Well, Mr. Blake, he saw the sailor reading the newspaper at one table,
and the mechanic reading the newspaper at another. It was dusk before
the sailor got up, and left the place. He looked about him suspiciously
when he got out into the street. The boy—_being_ a boy—passed
unnoticed. The mechanic had not come out yet. The sailor walked on,
looking about him, and apparently not very certain of where he was
going next. The mechanic appeared once more, on the opposite side of
the road. The sailor went on, till he got to Shore Lane, leading into
Lower Thames Street. There he stopped before a public-house, under the
sign of ‘The Wheel of Fortune,’ and, after examining the place outside,
went in. Gooseberry went in too. There were a great many people, mostly
of the decent sort, at the bar. ‘The Wheel of Fortune’ is a very
respectable house, Mr. Blake; famous for its porter and pork-pies.”

The Sergeant’s digressions irritated me. He saw it; and confined
himself more strictly to Gooseberry’s evidence when he went on.

“The sailor,” he resumed, “asked if he could have a bed. The landlord
said ‘No; they were full.’ The barmaid corrected him, and said ‘Number
Ten was empty.’ A waiter was sent for to show the sailor to Number Ten.
Just before that, Gooseberry had noticed the mechanic among the people
at the bar. Before the waiter had answered the call, the mechanic had
vanished. The sailor was taken off to his room. Not knowing what to do
next, Gooseberry had the wisdom to wait and see if anything happened.
Something did happen. The landlord was called for. Angry voices were
heard upstairs. The mechanic suddenly made his appearance again,
collared by the landlord, and exhibiting, to Gooseberry’s great
surprise, all the signs and tokens of being drunk. The landlord thrust
him out at the door, and threatened him with the police if he came
back. From the altercation between them, while this was going on, it
appeared that the man had been discovered in Number Ten, and had
declared with drunken obstinacy that he had taken the room. Gooseberry
was so struck by this sudden intoxication of a previously sober person,
that he couldn’t resist running out after the mechanic into the street.
As long as he was in sight of the public-house, the man reeled about in
the most disgraceful manner. The moment he turned the corner of the
street, he recovered his balance instantly, and became as sober a
member of society as you could wish to see. Gooseberry went back to
‘The Wheel of Fortune’ in a very bewildered state of mind. He waited
about again, on the chance of something happening. Nothing happened;
and nothing more was to be heard, or seen, of the sailor. Gooseberry
decided on going back to the office. Just as he came to this
conclusion, who should appear, on the opposite side of the street as
usual, but the mechanic again! He looked up at one particular window at
the top of the public-house, which was the only one that had a light in
it. The light seemed to relieve his mind. He left the place directly.
The boy made his way back to Gray’s Inn—got your card and
message—called—and failed to find you. There you have the state of the
case, Mr. Blake, as it stands at the present time.”

“What is your own opinion of the case, Sergeant?”

“I think it’s serious, sir. Judging by what the boy saw, the Indians
are in it, to begin with.”

“Yes. And the sailor is evidently the person to whom Mr. Luker passed
the Diamond. It seems odd that Mr. Bruff, and I, and the man in Mr.
Bruff’s employment, should all have been mistaken about who the person
was.”

“Not at all, Mr. Blake. Considering the risk that person ran, it’s
likely enough that Mr. Luker purposely misled you, by previous
arrangement between them.”

“Do you understand the proceedings at the public-house?” I asked. “The
man dressed like a mechanic was acting of course in the employment of
the Indians. But I am as much puzzled to account for his sudden
assumption of drunkenness as Gooseberry himself.”

“I think I can give a guess at what it means, sir,” said the Sergeant.
“If you will reflect, you will see that the man must have had some
pretty strict instructions from the Indians. They were far too
noticeable themselves to risk being seen at the bank, or in the
public-house—they were obliged to trust everything to their deputy.
Very good. Their deputy hears a certain number named in the
public-house, as the number of the room which the sailor is to have for
the night—that being also the room (unless our notion is all wrong)
which the Diamond is to have for the night, too. Under those
circumstances, the Indians, you may rely on it, would insist on having
a description of the room—of its position in the house, of its
capability of being approached from the outside, and so on. What was
the man to do, with such orders as these? Just what he did! He ran
upstairs to get a look at the room, before the sailor was taken into
it. He was found there, making his observations—and he shammed drunk,
as the easiest way of getting out of the difficulty. That’s how I read
the riddle. After he was turned out of the public-house, he probably
went with his report to the place where his employers were waiting for
him. And his employers, no doubt, sent him back to make sure that the
sailor was really settled at the public-house till the next morning. As
for what happened at ‘The Wheel of Fortune,’ after the boy left—we
ought to have discovered that last night. It’s eleven in the morning,
now. We must hope for the best, and find out what we can.”

In a quarter of an hour more, the cab stopped in Shore Lane, and
Gooseberry opened the door for us to get out.

“All right?” asked the Sergeant.

“All right,” answered the boy.

The moment we entered “The Wheel of Fortune” it was plain even to my
inexperienced eyes that there was something wrong in the house.

The only person behind the counter at which the liquors were served,
was a bewildered servant girl, perfectly ignorant of the business. One
or two customers, waiting for their morning drink, were tapping
impatiently on the counter with their money. The barmaid appeared from
the inner regions of the parlour, excited and preoccupied. She answered
Sergeant Cuff’s inquiry for the landlord, by telling him sharply that
her master was upstairs, and was not to be bothered by anybody.

“Come along with me, sir,” said Sergeant Cuff, coolly leading the way
upstairs, and beckoning to the boy to follow him.

The barmaid called to her master, and warned him that strangers were
intruding themselves into the house. On the first floor we were
encountered by the landlord, hurrying down, in a highly irritated
state, to see what was the matter.

“Who the devil are you? and what do you want here?” he asked.

“Keep your temper,” said the Sergeant, quietly. “I’ll tell you who I am
to begin with. I am Sergeant Cuff.”

The illustrious name instantly produced its effect. The angry landlord
threw open the door of a sitting-room, and asked the Sergeant’s pardon.

“I am annoyed and out of sorts, sir—that’s the truth,” he said.
“Something unpleasant has happened in the house this morning. A man in
my way of business has a deal to upset his temper, Sergeant Cuff.”

“Not a doubt of it,” said the Sergeant. “I’ll come at once, if you will
allow me, to what brings us here. This gentleman and I want to trouble
you with a few inquiries, on a matter of some interest to both of us.”

“Relating to what, sir?” asked the landlord.

“Relating to a dark man, dressed like a sailor, who slept here last
night.”

“Good God! that’s the man who is upsetting the whole house at this
moment!” exclaimed the landlord. “Do you, or does this gentleman know
anything about him?”

“We can’t be certain till we see him,” answered the Sergeant.

“See him?” echoed the landlord. “That’s the one thing that nobody has
been able to do since seven o’clock this morning. That was the time
when he left word, last night, that he was to be called. He _was_
called—and there was no getting an answer from him, and no opening his
door to see what was the matter. They tried again at eight, and they
tried again at nine. No use! There was the door still locked—and not a
sound to be heard in the room! I have been out this morning—and I only
got back a quarter of an hour ago. I have hammered at the door
myself—and all to no purpose. The potboy has gone to fetch a carpenter.
If you can wait a few minutes, gentlemen, we will have the door opened,
and see what it means.”

“Was the man drunk last night?” asked Sergeant Cuff.

“Perfectly sober, sir—or I would never have let him sleep in my house.”

“Did he pay for his bed beforehand?”

“No.”

“Could he leave the room in any way, without going out by the door?”

“The room is a garret,” said the landlord. “But there’s a trap-door in
the ceiling, leading out on to the roof—and a little lower down the
street, there’s an empty house under repair. Do you think, Sergeant,
the blackguard has got off in that way, without paying?”

“A sailor,” said Sergeant Cuff, “might have done it—early in the
morning, before the street was astir. He would be used to climbing, and
his head wouldn’t fail him on the roofs of the houses.”

As he spoke, the arrival of the carpenter was announced. We all went
upstairs, at once, to the top story. I noticed that the Sergeant was
unusually grave, even for _him_. It also struck me as odd that he told
the boy (after having previously encouraged him to follow us), to wait
in the room below till we came down again.

The carpenter’s hammer and chisel disposed of the resistance of the
door in a few minutes. But some article of furniture had been placed
against it inside, as a barricade. By pushing at the door, we thrust
this obstacle aside, and so got admission to the room. The landlord
entered first; the Sergeant second; and I third. The other persons
present followed us.

We all looked towards the bed, and all started.

The man had not left the room. He lay, dressed, on the bed—with a white
pillow over his face, which completely hid it from view.

“What does that mean?” said the landlord, pointing to the pillow.

Sergeant Cuff led the way to the bed, without answering, and removed
the pillow.

The man’s swarthy face was placid and still; his black hair and beard
were slightly, very slightly, discomposed. His eyes stared wide-open,
glassy and vacant, at the ceiling. The filmy look and the fixed
expression of them horrified me. I turned away, and went to the open
window. The rest of them remained, where Sergeant Cuff remained, at the
bed.

“He’s in a fit!” I heard the landlord say.

“He’s dead,” the Sergeant answered. “Send for the nearest doctor, and
send for the police.”

The waiter was despatched on both errands. Some strange fascination
seemed to hold Sergeant Cuff to the bed. Some strange curiosity seemed
to keep the rest of them waiting, to see what the Sergeant would do
next.

I turned again to the window. The moment afterwards, I felt a soft pull
at my coat-tails, and a small voice whispered, “Look here, sir!”

Gooseberry had followed us into the room. His loose eyes rolled
frightfully—not in terror, but in exultation. He had made a
detective-discovery on his own account. “Look here, sir,” he
repeated—and led me to a table in the corner of the room.

On the table stood a little wooden box, open, and empty. On one side of
the box lay some jewellers’ cotton. On the other side, was a torn sheet
of white paper, with a seal on it, partly destroyed, and with an
inscription in writing, which was still perfectly legible. The
inscription was in these words:

“Deposited with Messrs. Bushe, Lysaught, and Bushe, by Mr. Septimus
Luker, of Middlesex Place, Lambeth, a small wooden box, sealed up in
this envelope, and containing a valuable of great price. The box, when
claimed, to be only given up by Messrs. Bushe and Co. on the personal
application of Mr. Luker.”

Those lines removed all further doubt, on one point at least. The
sailor had been in possession of the Moonstone, when he had left the
bank on the previous day.

I felt another pull at my coat-tails. Gooseberry had not done with me
yet.

“Robbery!” whispered the boy, pointing, in high delight, to the empty
box.

“You were told to wait downstairs,” I said. “Go away!”

“And Murder!” added Gooseberry, pointing, with a keener relish still,
to the man on the bed.

There was something so hideous in the boy’s enjoyment of the horror of
the scene, that I took him by the two shoulders and put him out of the
room.

At the moment when I crossed the threshold of the door, I heard
Sergeant Cuff’s voice, asking where I was. He met me, as I returned
into the room, and forced me to go back with him to the bedside.

“Mr. Blake!” he said. “Look at the man’s face. It is a face
disguised—and here’s the proof of it!”

He traced with his finger a thin line of livid white, running backward
from the dead man’s forehead, between the swarthy complexion, and the
slightly-disturbed black hair. “Let’s see what is under this,” said the
Sergeant, suddenly seizing the black hair, with a firm grip of his
hand.

My nerves were not strong enough to bear it. I turned away again from
the bed.

The first sight that met my eyes, at the other end of the room, was the
irrepressible Gooseberry, perched on a chair, and looking with
breathless interest, over the heads of his elders, at the Sergeant’s
proceedings.

“He’s pulling off his wig!” whispered Gooseberry, compassionating my
position, as the only person in the room who could see nothing.

There was a pause—and then a cry of astonishment among the people round
the bed.

“He’s pulled off his beard!” cried Gooseberry.

There was another pause—Sergeant Cuff asked for something. The landlord
went to the wash-hand-stand, and returned to the bed with a basin of
water and a towel.

Gooseberry danced with excitement on the chair. “Come up here, along
with me, sir! He’s washing off his complexion now!”

The Sergeant suddenly burst his way through the people about him, and
came, with horror in his face, straight to the place where I was
standing.

“Come back to the bed, sir!” he began. He looked at me closer, and
checked himself “No!” he resumed. “Open the sealed letter first—the
letter I gave you this morning.”

I opened the letter.

“Read the name, Mr. Blake, that I have written inside.”

I read the name that he had written. It was—_Godfrey Ablewhite_.

“Now,” said the Sergeant, “come with me, and look at the man on the
bed.”

I went with him, and looked at the man on the bed.

GODFREY ABLEWHITE!


SIXTH NARRATIVE.

_Contributed by Sergeant Cuff._

I

Dorking, Surrey, July 30th, 1849. To Franklin Blake, Esq. Sir,—I beg to
apologise for the delay that has occurred in the production of the
Report, with which I engaged to furnish you. I have waited to make it a
complete Report; and I have been met, here and there, by obstacles
which it was only possible to remove by some little expenditure of
patience and time.

The object which I proposed to myself has now, I hope, been attained.
You will find, in these pages, answers to the greater part—if not
all—of the questions, concerning the late Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite, which
occurred to your mind when I last had the honour of seeing you.

I propose to tell you—in the first place—what is known of the manner in
which your cousin met his death; appending to the statement such
inferences and conclusions as we are justified (according to my
opinion) in drawing from the facts.

I shall then endeavour—in the second place—to put you in possession of
such discoveries as I have made, respecting the proceedings of Mr.
Godfrey Ablewhite, before, during and after the time, when you and he
met as guests at the late Lady Verinder’s country house.


II

As to your cousin’s death, then, first.

It appears to be established, beyond any reasonable doubt, that he was
killed (while he was asleep, or immediately on his waking) by being
smothered with a pillow from his bed—that the persons guilty of
murdering him are the three Indians—and that the object contemplated
(and achieved) by the crime, was to obtain possession of the diamond,
called the Moonstone.

The facts from which this conclusion is drawn, are derived partly from
an examination of the room at the tavern; and partly from the evidence
obtained at the Coroner’s Inquest.

On forcing the door of the room, the deceased gentleman was discovered,
dead, with the pillow of the bed over his face. The medical man who
examined him, being informed of this circumstance, considered the
post-mortem appearances as being perfectly compatible with murder by
smothering—that is to say, with murder committed by some person, or
persons, pressing the pillow over the nose and mouth of the deceased,
until death resulted from congestion of the lungs.

Next, as to the motive for the crime.

A small box, with a sealed paper torn off from it (the paper containing
an inscription) was found open, and empty, on a table in the room. Mr.
Luker has himself personally identified the box, the seal, and the
inscription. He has declared that the box did actually contain the
diamond, called the Moonstone; and he has admitted having given the box
(thus sealed up) to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite (then concealed under a
disguise), on the afternoon of the twenty-sixth of June last. The fair
inference from all this is, that the stealing of the Moonstone was the
motive of the crime.

Next, as to the manner in which the crime was committed.

On examination of the room (which is only seven feet high), a trap-door
in the ceiling, leading out on to the roof of the house, was discovered
open. The short ladder, used for obtaining access to the trap-door (and
kept under the bed), was found placed at the opening, so as to enable
any person or persons, in the room, to leave it again easily. In the
trap-door itself was found a square aperture cut in the wood,
apparently with some exceedingly sharp instrument, just behind the bolt
which fastened the door on the inner side. In this way, any person from
the outside could have drawn back the bolt, and opened the door, and
have dropped (or have been noiselessly lowered by an accomplice) into
the room—its height, as already observed, being only seven feet. That
some person, or persons, must have got admission in this way, appears
evident from the fact of the aperture being there. As to the manner in
which he (or they) obtained access to the roof of the tavern, it is to
be remarked that the third house, lower down in the street, was empty,
and under repair—that a long ladder was left by the workmen, leading
from the pavement to the top of the house—and that, on returning to
their work, on the morning of the 27th, the men found the plank which
they had tied to the ladder, to prevent anyone from using it in their
absence, removed, and lying on the ground. As to the possibility of
ascending by this ladder, passing over the roofs of the houses, passing
back, and descending again, unobserved—it is discovered, on the
evidence of the night policeman, that he only passes through Shore Lane
twice in an hour, when out on his beat. The testimony of the
inhabitants also declares, that Shore Lane, after midnight, is one of
the quietest and loneliest streets in London. Here again, therefore, it
seems fair to infer that—with ordinary caution, and presence of
mind—any man, or men, might have ascended by the ladder, and might have
descended again, unobserved. Once on the roof of the tavern, it has
been proved, by experiment, that a man might cut through the trap-door,
while lying down on it, and that in such a position, the parapet in
front of the house would conceal him from the view of anyone passing in
the street.

Lastly, as to the person, or persons, by whom the crime was committed.

It is known (1) that the Indians had an interest in possessing
themselves of the Diamond. (2) It is at least probable that the man
looking like an Indian, whom Octavius Guy saw at the window of the cab,
speaking to the man dressed like a mechanic, was one of the three
Hindoo conspirators. (3) It is certain that this same man dressed like
a mechanic, was seen keeping Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite in view, all through
the evening of the 26th, and was found in the bedroom (before Mr.
Ablewhite was shown into it) under circumstances which lead to the
suspicion that he was examining the room. (4) A morsel of torn gold
thread was picked up in the bedroom, which persons expert in such
matters, declare to be of Indian manufacture, and to be a species of
gold thread not known in England. (5) On the morning of the 27th, three
men, answering to the description of the three Indians, were observed
in Lower Thames Street, were traced to the Tower Wharf, and were seen
to leave London by the steamer bound for Rotterdam.

There is here, moral, if not legal, evidence, that the murder was
committed by the Indians.

Whether the man personating a mechanic was, or was not, an accomplice
in the crime, it is impossible to say. That he could have committed the
murder alone, seems beyond the limits of probability. Acting by
himself, he could hardly have smothered Mr. Ablewhite—who was the
taller and stronger man of the two—without a struggle taking place, or
a cry being heard. A servant girl, sleeping in the next room, heard
nothing. The landlord, sleeping in the room below, heard nothing. The
whole evidence points to the inference that more than one man was
concerned in this crime—and the circumstances, I repeat, morally
justify the conclusion that the Indians committed it.

I have only to add, that the verdict at the Coroner’s Inquest was
Wilful Murder against some person, or persons, unknown. Mr. Ablewhite’s
family have offered a reward, and no effort has been left untried to
discover the guilty persons. The man dressed like a mechanic has eluded
all inquiries. The Indians have been traced. As to the prospect of
ultimately capturing these last, I shall have a word to say to you on
that head, when I reach the end of the present Report.

In the meanwhile, having now written all that is needful on the subject
of Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s death, I may pass next to the narrative of
his proceedings before, during, and after the time, when you and he met
at the late Lady Verinder’s house.


III

With regard to the subject now in hand, I may state, at the outset,
that Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s life had two sides to it.

The side turned up to the public view, presented the spectacle of a
gentleman, possessed of considerable reputation as a speaker at
charitable meetings, and endowed with administrative abilities, which
he placed at the disposal of various Benevolent Societies, mostly of
the female sort. The side kept hidden from the general notice,
exhibited this same gentleman in the totally different character of a
man of pleasure, with a villa in the suburbs which was not taken in his
own name, and with a lady in the villa, who was not taken in his own
name, either.

My investigations in the villa have shown me several fine pictures and
statues; furniture tastefully selected, and admirably made; and a
conservatory of the rarest flowers, the match of which it would not be
easy to find in all London. My investigation of the lady has resulted
in the discovery of jewels which are worthy to take rank with the
flowers, and of carriages and horses which have (deservedly) produced a
sensation in the Park, among persons well qualified to judge of the
build of the one, and the breed of the others.

All this is, so far, common enough. The villa and the lady are such
familiar objects in London life, that I ought to apologise for
introducing them to notice. But what is not common and not familiar (in
my experience), is that all these fine things were not only ordered,
but paid for. The pictures, the statues, the flowers, the jewels, the
carriages, and the horses—inquiry proved, to my indescribable
astonishment, that not a sixpence of debt was owing on any of them. As
to the villa, it had been bought, out and out, and settled on the lady.

I might have tried to find the right reading of this riddle, and tried
in vain—but for Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s death, which caused an inquiry
to be made into the state of his affairs.

The inquiry elicited these facts:—

That Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite was entrusted with the care of a sum of
twenty thousand pounds—as one of two Trustees for a young gentleman,
who was still a minor in the year eighteen hundred and forty-eight.
That the Trust was to lapse, and that the young gentleman was to
receive the twenty thousand pounds on the day when he came of age, in
the month of February, eighteen hundred and fifty. That, pending the
arrival of this period, an income of six hundred pounds was to be paid
to him by his two Trustees, half-yearly—at Christmas and Midsummer Day.
That this income was regularly paid by the active Trustee, Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite. That the twenty thousand pounds (from which the income was
supposed to be derived) had every farthing of it been sold out of the
Funds, at different periods, ending with the end of the year eighteen
hundred and forty-seven. That the power of attorney, authorising the
bankers to sell out the stock, and the various written orders telling
them what amounts to sell out, were formally signed by both the
Trustees. That the signature of the second Trustee (a retired army
officer, living in the country) was a signature forged, in every case,
by the active Trustee—otherwise Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

In these facts lies the explanation of Mr. Godfrey’s honourable
conduct, in paying the debts incurred for the lady and the villa—and
(as you will presently see) of more besides.

We may now advance to the date of Miss Verinder’s birthday (in the year
eighteen hundred and forty-eight)—the twenty-first of June.

On the day before, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite arrived at his father’s house,
and asked (as I know from Mr. Ablewhite, senior, himself) for a loan of
three hundred pounds. Mark the sum; and remember at the same time, that
the half-yearly payment to the young gentleman was due on the
twenty-fourth of the month. Also, that the whole of the young
gentleman’s fortune had been spent by his Trustee, by the end of the
year ’forty-seven.

Mr. Ablewhite, senior, refused to lend his son a farthing.

The next day Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite rode over, with you, to Lady
Verinder’s house. A few hours afterwards, Mr. Godfrey (as you yourself
have told me) made a proposal of marriage to Miss Verinder. Here, he
saw his way no doubt—if accepted—to the end of all his money anxieties,
present and future. But, as events actually turned out, what happened?
Miss Verinder refused him.

On the night of the birthday, therefore, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s
pecuniary position was this. He had three hundred pounds to find on the
twenty-fourth of the month, and twenty thousand pounds to find in
February eighteen hundred and fifty. Failing to raise these sums, at
these times, he was a ruined man.

Under those circumstances, what takes place next?

You exasperate Mr. Candy, the doctor, on the sore subject of his
profession; and he plays you a practical joke, in return, with a dose
of laudanum. He trusts the administration of the dose, prepared in a
little phial, to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite—who has himself confessed the
share he had in the matter, under circumstances which shall presently
be related to you. Mr. Godfrey is all the readier to enter into the
conspiracy, having himself suffered from your sharp tongue in the
course of the evening. He joins Betteredge in persuading you to drink a
little brandy and water before you go to bed. He privately drops the
dose of laudanum into your cold grog. And you drink the mixture.

Let us now shift the scene, if you please to Mr. Luker’s house at
Lambeth. And allow me to remark, by way of preface, that Mr. Bruff and
I, together, have found a means of forcing the money-lender to make a
clean breast of it. We have carefully sifted the statement he has
addressed to us; and here it is at your service.


IV

Late on the evening of Friday, the twenty-third of June (’forty-eight),
Mr. Luker was surprised by a visit from Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. He was
more than surprised, when Mr. Godfrey produced the Moonstone. No such
Diamond (according to Mr. Luker’s experience) was in the possession of
any private person in Europe.

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite had two modest proposals to make, in relation to
this magnificent gem. First, Would Mr. Luker be so good as to buy it?
Secondly, Would Mr. Luker (in default of seeing his way to the
purchase) undertake to sell it on commission, and to pay a sum down, on
the anticipated result?

Mr. Luker tested the Diamond, weighed the Diamond and estimated the
value of the Diamond, before he answered a word. _His_ estimate
(allowing for the flaw in the stone) was thirty thousand pounds.

Having reached that result, Mr. Luker opened his lips, and put a
question: “How did you come by this?” Only six words! But what volumes
of meaning in them!

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite began a story. Mr. Luker opened his lips again,
and only said three words, this time. “That won’t do!”

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite began another story. Mr. Luker wasted no more
words on him. He got up, and rang the bell for the servant to show the
gentleman out.

Upon this compulsion, Mr. Godfrey made an effort, and came out with a
new and amended version of the affair, to the following effect.

After privately slipping the laudanum into your brandy and water, he
wished you good-night, and went into his own room. It was the next room
to yours; and the two had a door of communication between them. On
entering his own room Mr. Godfrey (as he supposed) closed his door. His
money troubles kept him awake. He sat, in his dressing-gown and
slippers, for nearly an hour, thinking over his position. Just as he
was preparing to get into bed, he heard you, talking to yourself, in
your own room, and going to the door of communication, found that he
had not shut it as he supposed.

He looked into your room to see what was the matter. He discovered you
with the candle in your hand, just leaving your bedchamber. He heard
you say to yourself, in a voice quite unlike your own voice, “How do I
know? The Indians may be hidden in the house.”

Up to that time, he had simply supposed himself (in giving you the
laudanum) to be helping to make you the victim of a harmless practical
joke. It now occurred to him, that the laudanum had taken some effect
on you, which had not been foreseen by the doctor, any more than by
himself. In the fear of an accident happening he followed you softly to
see what you would do.

He followed you to Miss Verinder’s sitting-room, and saw you go in. You
left the door open. He looked through the crevice thus produced,
between the door and the post, before he ventured into the room
himself.

In that position, he not only detected you in taking the Diamond out of
the drawer—he also detected Miss Verinder, silently watching you from
her bedroom, through her open door. His own eyes satisfied him that
_she_ saw you take the Diamond, too.

Before you left the sitting-room again, you hesitated a little. Mr.
Godfrey took advantage of this hesitation to get back again to his
bedroom before you came out, and discovered him. He had barely got
back, before you got back too. You saw him (as he supposes) just as he
was passing through the door of communication. At any rate, you called
to him in a strange, drowsy voice.

He came back to you. You looked at him in a dull sleepy way. You put
the Diamond into his hand. You said to him, “Take it back, Godfrey, to
your father’s bank. It’s safe there—it’s not safe here.” You turned
away unsteadily, and put on your dressing-gown. You sat down in the
large arm-chair in your room. You said, “_I_ can’t take it back to the
bank. My head’s like lead—and I can’t feel my feet under me.” Your head
sank on the back of the chair—you heaved a heavy sigh—and you fell
asleep.

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite went back, with the Diamond, into his own room.
His statement is, that he came to no conclusion, at that time—except
that he would wait, and see what happened in the morning.

When the morning came, your language and conduct showed that you were
absolutely ignorant of what you had said and done overnight. At the
same time, Miss Verinder’s language and conduct showed that she was
resolved to say nothing (in mercy to you) on her side. If Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite chose to keep the Diamond, he might do so with perfect
impunity. The Moonstone stood between him and ruin. He put the
Moonstone into his pocket.


V

This was the story told by your cousin (under pressure of necessity) to
Mr. Luker.

Mr. Luker believed the story to be, as to all main essentials, true—on
this ground, that Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite was too great a fool to have
invented it. Mr. Bruff and I agree with Mr. Luker, in considering this
test of the truth of the story to be a perfectly reliable one.

The next question, was the question of what Mr. Luker would do in the
matter of the Moonstone. He proposed the following terms, as the only
terms on which he would consent to mix himself up with, what was (even
in _his_ line of business) a doubtful and dangerous transaction.

Mr. Luker would consent to lend Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite the sum of two
thousand pounds, on condition that the Moonstone was to be deposited
with him as a pledge. If, at the expiration of one year from that date,
Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite paid three thousand pounds to Mr. Luker, he was
to receive back the Diamond, as a pledge redeemed. If he failed to
produce the money at the expiration of the year, the pledge (otherwise
the Moonstone) was to be considered as forfeited to Mr. Luker—who
would, in this latter case, generously make Mr. Godfrey a present of
certain promissory notes of his (relating to former dealings) which
were then in the money-lender’s possession.

It is needless to say, that Mr. Godfrey indignantly refused to listen
to these monstrous terms. Mr. Luker thereupon, handed him back the
Diamond, and wished him good-night.

Your cousin went to the door, and came back again. How was he to be
sure that the conversation of that evening would be kept strictly
secret between his friend and himself?

Mr. Luker didn’t profess to know how. If Mr. Godfrey had accepted his
terms, Mr. Godfrey would have made him an accomplice, and might have
counted on his silence as on a certainty. As things were, Mr. Luker
must be guided by his own interests. If awkward inquiries were made,
how could he be expected to compromise himself, for the sake of a man
who had declined to deal with him?

Receiving this reply, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite did, what all animals
(human and otherwise) do, when they find themselves caught in a trap.
He looked about him in a state of helpless despair. The day of the
month, recorded on a neat little card in a box on the money-lender’s
chimney-piece, happened to attract his eye. It was the twenty-third of
June. On the twenty-fourth he had three hundred pounds to pay to the
young gentleman for whom he was trustee, and no chance of raising the
money, except the chance that Mr. Luker had offered to him. But for
this miserable obstacle, he might have taken the Diamond to Amsterdam,
and have made a marketable commodity of it, by having it cut up into
separate stones. As matters stood, he had no choice but to accept Mr.
Luker’s terms. After all, he had a year at his disposal, in which to
raise the three thousand pounds—and a year is a long time.

Mr. Luker drew out the necessary documents on the spot. When they were
signed, he gave Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite two cheques. One, dated June
23rd, for three hundred pounds. Another, dated a week on, for the
remaining balance seventeen hundred pounds.

How the Moonstone was trusted to the keeping of Mr Luker’s bankers, and
how the Indians treated Mr. Luker and Mr. Godfrey (after that had been
done) you know already.

The next event in your cousin’s life refers again to Miss Verinder. He
proposed marriage to her for the second time—and (after having being
accepted) he consented, at her request, to consider the marriage as
broken off. One of his reasons for making this concession has been
penetrated by Mr. Bruff. Miss Verinder had only a life interest in her
mother’s property—and there was no raising the twenty thousand pounds
on _that_.

But you will say, he might have saved the three thousand pounds, to
redeem the pledged Diamond, if he had married. He might have done so
certainly—supposing neither his wife, nor her guardians and trustees,
objected to his anticipating more than half of the income at his
disposal, for some unknown purpose, in the first year of his marriage.
But even if he got over this obstacle, there was another waiting for
him in the background. The lady at the Villa, had heard of his
contemplated marriage. A superb woman, Mr. Blake, of the sort that are
not to be trifled with—the sort with the light complexion and the Roman
nose. She felt the utmost contempt for Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. It would
be silent contempt, if he made a handsome provision for her. Otherwise,
it would be contempt with a tongue to it. Miss Verinder’s life interest
allowed him no more hope of raising the “provision” than of raising the
twenty thousand pounds. He couldn’t marry—he really couldn’t marry,
under all the circumstances.

How he tried his luck again with another lady, and how _that_ marriage
also broke down on the question of money, you know already. You also
know of the legacy of five thousand pounds, left to him shortly
afterwards, by one of those many admirers among the soft sex whose good
graces this fascinating man had contrived to win. That legacy (as the
event has proved) led him to his death.

I have ascertained that when he went abroad, on getting his five
thousand pounds, he went to Amsterdam. There he made all the necessary
arrangements for having the Diamond cut into separate stones. He came
back (in disguise), and redeemed the Moonstone, on the appointed day. A
few days were allowed to elapse (as a precaution agreed to by both
parties) before the jewel was actually taken out of the bank. If he had
got safe with it to Amsterdam, there would have been just time between
July ’forty-nine, and February ’fifty (when the young gentleman came of
age) to cut the Diamond, and to make a marketable commodity (polished
or unpolished) of the separate stones. Judge from this, what motives he
had to run the risk which he actually ran. It was “neck or nothing”
with him—if ever it was “neck or nothing” with a man yet.

I have only to remind you, before closing this Report, that there is a
chance of laying hands on the Indians, and of recovering the Moonstone
yet. They are now (there is every reason to believe) on their passage
to Bombay, in an East Indiaman. The ship (barring accidents) will touch
at no other port on her way out; and the authorities at Bombay (already
communicated with by letter, overland) will be prepared to board the
vessel, the moment she enters the harbour.

I have the honour to remain, dear sir, your obedient servant, RICHARD
CUFF (late sergeant in the Detective Force, Scotland Yard, London).*

* NOTE.—Wherever the Report touches on the events of the birthday, or
of the three days that followed it, compare with Betteredge’s
Narrative, chapters viii. to xiii.

SEVENTH NARRATIVE.

_In a Letter from Mr. Candy._


Frizinghall, Wednesday, September 26th, 1849.—Dear Mr. Franklin Blake,
you will anticipate the sad news I have to tell you, on finding your
letter to Ezra Jennings returned to you, unopened, in this enclosure.
He died in my arms, at sunrise, on Wednesday last.

I am not to blame for having failed to warn you that his end was at
hand. He expressly forbade me to write to you. “I am indebted to Mr.
Franklin Blake,” he said, “for having seen some happy days. Don’t
distress him, Mr. Candy—don’t distress him.”

His sufferings, up to the last six hours of his life, were terrible to
see. In the intervals of remission, when his mind was clear, I
entreated him to tell me of any relatives of his to whom I might write.
He asked to be forgiven for refusing anything to _me_. And then he
said—not bitterly—that he would die as he had lived, forgotten and
unknown. He maintained that resolution to the last. There is no hope
now of making any discoveries concerning him. His story is a blank.

The day before he died, he told me where to find all his papers. I
brought them to him on his bed. There was a little bundle of old
letters which he put aside. There was his unfinished book. There was
his Diary—in many locked volumes. He opened the volume for this year,
and tore out, one by one, the pages relating to the time when you and
he were together. “Give those,” he said, “to Mr. Franklin Blake. In
years to come, he may feel an interest in looking back at what is
written there.” Then he clasped his hands, and prayed God fervently to
bless you, and those dear to you. He said he should like to see you
again. But the next moment he altered his mind. “No,” he answered when
I offered to write. “I won’t distress him! I won’t distress him!”

At his request I next collected the other papers—that is to say, the
bundle of letters, the unfinished book and the volumes of the Diary—and
enclosed them all in one wrapper, sealed with my own seal. “Promise,”
he said, “that you will put this into my coffin with your own hand; and
that you will see that no other hand touches it afterwards.”

I gave him my promise. And the promise has been performed.

He asked me to do one other thing for him—which it cost me a hard
struggle to comply with. He said, “Let my grave be forgotten. Give me
your word of honour that you will allow no monument of any sort—not
even the commonest tombstone—to mark the place of my burial. Let me
sleep, nameless. Let me rest, unknown.” When I tried to plead with him
to alter his resolution, he became for the first, and only time,
violently agitated. I could not bear to see it; and I gave way. Nothing
but a little grass mound marks the place of his rest. In time, the
tombstones will rise round it. And the people who come after us will
look and wonder at the nameless grave.

As I have told you, for six hours before his death his sufferings
ceased. He dozed a little. I think he dreamed. Once or twice he smiled.
A woman’s name, as I suppose—the name of “Ella”—was often on his lips
at this time. A few minutes before the end he asked me to lift him on
his pillow, to see the sun rise through the window. He was very weak.
His head fell on my shoulder. He whispered, “It’s coming!” Then he
said, “Kiss me!” I kissed his forehead. On a sudden he lifted his head.
The sunlight touched his face. A beautiful expression, an angelic
expression, came over it. He cried out three times, “Peace! peace!
peace!” His head sank back again on my shoulder, and the long trouble
of his life was at an end.

So he has gone from us. This was, as I think, a great man—though the
world never knew him. He had the sweetest temper I have ever met with.
The loss of him makes me feel very lonely. Perhaps I have never been
quite myself since my illness. Sometimes, I think of giving up my
practice, and going away, and trying what some of the foreign baths and
waters will do for me.

It is reported here, that you and Miss Verinder are to be married next
month. Please to accept my best congratulations.

The pages of my poor friend’s Journal are waiting for you at my
house—sealed up, with your name on the wrapper. I was afraid to trust
them to the post.

My best respects and good wishes attend Miss Verinder. I remain, dear
Mr. Franklin Blake, truly yours,

THOMAS CANDY.


EIGHTH NARRATIVE.

_Contributed by Gabriel Betteredge._


I am the person (as you remember no doubt) who led the way in these
pages, and opened the story. I am also the person who is left behind,
as it were, to close the story up.

Let nobody suppose that I have any last words to say here concerning
the Indian Diamond. I hold that unlucky jewel in abhorrence—and I refer
you to other authority than mine, for such news of the Moonstone as you
may, at the present time, be expected to receive. My purpose, in this
place, is to state a fact in the history of the family, which has been
passed over by everybody, and which I won’t allow to be disrespectfully
smothered up in that way. The fact to which I allude is—the marriage of
Miss Rachel and Mr. Franklin Blake. This interesting event took place
at our house in Yorkshire, on Tuesday, October ninth, eighteen hundred
and forty-nine. I had a new suit of clothes on the occasion. And the
married couple went to spend the honeymoon in Scotland.

Family festivals having been rare enough at our house, since my poor
mistress’s death, I own—on this occasion of the wedding—to having
(towards the latter part of the day) taken a drop too much on the
strength of it.

If you have ever done the same sort of thing yourself you will
understand and feel for me. If you have not, you will very likely say,
“Disgusting old man! why does he tell us this?” The reason why is now
to come.

Having, then, taken my drop (bless you! you have got your favourite
vice, too; only your vice isn’t mine, and mine isn’t yours), I next
applied the one infallible remedy—that remedy being, as you know,
_Robinson Crusoe_. Where I opened that unrivalled book, I can’t say.
Where the lines of print at last left off running into each other, I
know, however, perfectly well. It was at page three hundred and
eighteen—a domestic bit concerning Robinson Crusoe’s marriage, as
follows:

“With those Thoughts, I considered my new Engagement, that I had a
Wife”—(Observe! so had Mr. Franklin!)—“one Child born”—(Observe again!
that might yet be Mr. Franklin’s case, too!)—“and my Wife then”—What
Robinson Crusoe’s wife did, or did not do, “then,” I felt no desire to
discover. I scored the bit about the Child with my pencil, and put a
morsel of paper for a mark to keep the place; “Lie you there,” I said,
“till the marriage of Mr. Franklin and Miss Rachel is some months
older—and then we’ll see!”

The months passed (more than I had bargained for), and no occasion
presented itself for disturbing that mark in the book. It was not till
this present month of November, eighteen hundred and fifty, that Mr.
Franklin came into my room, in high good spirits, and said,
“Betteredge! I have got some news for you! Something is going to happen
in the house, before we are many months older.”

“Does it concern the family, sir?” I asked.

“It decidedly concerns the family,” says Mr. Franklin.

“Has your good lady anything to do with it, if you please, sir?”

“She has a great deal to do with it,” says Mr. Franklin, beginning to
look a little surprised.

“You needn’t say a word more, sir,” I answered. “God bless you both!
I’m heartily glad to hear it.”

Mr. Franklin stared like a person thunderstruck. “May I venture to
inquire where you got your information?” he asked. “I only got mine
(imparted in the strictest secrecy) five minutes since.”

Here was an opportunity of producing _Robinson Crusoe_! Here was a
chance of reading that domestic bit about the child which I had marked
on the day of Mr. Franklin’s marriage! I read those miraculous words
with an emphasis which did them justice, and then I looked him severely
in the face. “_Now_, sir, do you believe in _Robinson Crusoe_?” I
asked, with a solemnity, suitable to the occasion.

“Betteredge!” says Mr. Franklin, with equal solemnity, “I’m convinced
at last.” He shook hands with me—and I felt that I had converted him.

With the relation of this extraordinary circumstance, my reappearance
in these pages comes to an end. Let nobody laugh at the unique anecdote
here related. You are welcome to be as merry as you please over
everything else I have written. But when I write of _Robinson Crusoe_,
by the Lord it’s serious—and I request you to take it accordingly!

When this is said, all is said. Ladies and gentlemen, I make my bow,
and shut up the story.


EPILOGUE.


 THE FINDING OF THE DIAMOND.


I


 THE STATEMENT OF SERGEANT CUFF’S MAN. (1849.)

On the twenty-seventh of June last, I received instructions from
Sergeant Cuff to follow three men; suspected of murder, and described
as Indians. They had been seen on the Tower Wharf that morning,
embarking on board the steamer bound for Rotterdam.

I left London by a steamer belonging to another company, which sailed
on the morning of Thursday the twenty-eighth. Arriving at Rotterdam, I
succeeded in finding the commander of the Wednesday’s steamer. He
informed me that the Indians had certainly been passengers on board his
vessel—but as far as Gravesend only. Off that place, one of the three
had inquired at what time they would reach Calais. On being informed
that the steamer was bound to Rotterdam, the spokesman of the party
expressed the greatest surprise and distress at the mistake which he
and his two friends had made. They were all willing (he said) to
sacrifice their passage money, if the commander of the steamer would
only put them ashore. Commiserating their position, as foreigners in a
strange land, and knowing no reason for detaining them, the commander
signalled for a shore boat, and the three men left the vessel.

This proceeding of the Indians having been plainly resolved on
beforehand, as a means of preventing their being traced, I lost no time
in returning to England. I left the steamer at Gravesend, and
discovered that the Indians had gone from that place to London. Thence,
I again traced them as having left for Plymouth. Inquiries made at
Plymouth proved that they had sailed, forty-eight hours previously, in
the _Bewley Castle_, East Indiaman, bound direct to Bombay.

On receiving this intelligence, Sergeant Cuff caused the authorities at
Bombay to be communicated with, overland—so that the vessel might be
boarded by the police immediately on her entering the port. This step
having been taken, my connection with the matter came to an end. I have
heard nothing more of it since that time.


II


 THE STATEMENT OF THE CAPTAIN. (1849.)

I am requested by Sergeant Cuff to set in writing certain facts,
concerning three men (believed to be Hindoos) who were passengers, last
summer, in the ship _Bewley Castle_, bound for Bombay direct, under my
command.

The Hindoos joined us at Plymouth. On the passage out I heard no
complaint of their conduct. They were berthed in the forward part of
the vessel. I had but few occasions myself of personally noticing them.

In the latter part of the voyage, we had the misfortune to be becalmed
for three days and nights, off the coast of India. I have not got the
ship’s journal to refer to, and I cannot now call to mind the latitude
and longitude. As to our position, therefore, I am only able to state
generally that the currents drifted us in towards the land, and that
when the wind found us again, we reached our port in twenty-four hours
afterwards.

The discipline of a ship (as all seafaring persons know) becomes
relaxed in a long calm. The discipline of my ship became relaxed.
Certain gentlemen among the passengers got some of the smaller boats
lowered, and amused themselves by rowing about, and swimming, when the
sun at evening time was cool enough to let them divert themselves in
that way. The boats when done with ought to have been slung up again in
their places. Instead of this they were left moored to the ship’s side.
What with the heat, and what with the vexation of the weather, neither
officers nor men seemed to be in heart for their duty while the calm
lasted.

On the third night, nothing unusual was heard or seen by the watch on
deck. When the morning came, the smallest of the boats was missing—and
the three Hindoos were next reported to be missing, too.

If these men had stolen the boat shortly after dark (which I have no
doubt they did), we were near enough to the land to make it vain to
send in pursuit of them, when the discovery was made in the morning. I
have no doubt they got ashore, in that calm weather (making all due
allowance for fatigue and clumsy rowing), before day-break.

On reaching our port, I there learnt, for the first time, the reason
these passengers had for seizing their opportunity of escaping from the
ship. I could only make the same statement to the authorities which I
have made here. They considered me to blame for allowing the discipline
of the vessel to be relaxed. I have expressed my regret on this score
to them, and to my owners.

Since that time, nothing has been heard to my knowledge of the three
Hindoos. I have no more to add to what is here written.


III


 THE STATEMENT OF MR. MURTHWAITE. (1850.)

_(In a letter to Mr. Bruff.)_


Have you any recollection, my dear sir, of a semi-savage person whom
you met out at dinner, in London, in the autumn of ’forty-eight? Permit
me to remind you that the person’s name was Murthwaite, and that you
and he had a long conversation together after dinner. The talk related
to an Indian Diamond, called the Moonstone, and to a conspiracy then in
existence to get possession of the gem.

Since that time, I have been wandering in Central Asia. Thence I have
drifted back to the scene of some of my past adventures in the north
and north-west of India. About a fortnight since, I found myself in a
certain district or province (but little known to Europeans) called
Kattiawar.

Here an adventure befell me, in which (incredible as it may appear) you
are personally interested.

In the wild regions of Kattiawar (and how wild they are, you will
understand, when I tell you that even the husbandmen plough the land,
armed to the teeth), the population is fanatically devoted to the old
Hindoo religion—to the ancient worship of Bramah and Vishnu. The few
Mahometan families, thinly scattered about the villages in the
interior, are afraid to taste meat of any kind. A Mahometan even
suspected of killing that sacred animal, the cow, is, as a matter of
course, put to death without mercy in these parts by the pious Hindoo
neighbours who surround him. To strengthen the religious enthusiasm of
the people, two of the most famous shrines of Hindoo pilgrimage are
contained within the boundaries of Kattiawar. One of them is Dwarka,
the birthplace of the god Krishna. The other is the sacred city of
Somnauth—sacked, and destroyed as long since as the eleventh century,
by the Mahometan conqueror, Mahmoud of Ghizni.

Finding myself, for the second time, in these romantic regions, I
resolved not to leave Kattiawar, without looking once more on the
magnificent desolation of Somnauth. At the place where I planned to do
this, I was (as nearly as I could calculate it) some three days
distant, journeying on foot, from the sacred city.

I had not been long on the road, before I noticed that other people—by
twos and threes—appeared to be travelling in the same direction as
myself.

To such of these as spoke to me, I gave myself out as a
Hindoo-Boodhist, from a distant province, bound on a pilgrimage. It is
needless to say that my dress was of the sort to carry out this
description. Add, that I know the language as well as I know my own,
and that I am lean enough and brown enough to make it no easy matter to
detect my European origin—and you will understand that I passed muster
with the people readily: not as one of themselves, but as a stranger
from a distant part of their own country.

On the second day, the number of Hindoos travelling in my direction had
increased to fifties and hundreds. On the third day, the throng had
swollen to thousands; all slowly converging to one point—the city of
Somnauth.

A trifling service which I was able to render to one of my
fellow-pilgrims, during the third day’s journey, proved the means of
introducing me to certain Hindoos of the higher caste. From these men I
learnt that the multitude was on its way to a great religious ceremony,
which was to take place on a hill at a little distance from Somnauth.
The ceremony was in honour of the god of the Moon; and it was to be
held at night.

The crowd detained us as we drew near to the place of celebration. By
the time we reached the hill the moon was high in the heaven. My Hindoo
friends possessed some special privileges which enabled them to gain
access to the shrine. They kindly allowed me to accompany them. When we
arrived at the place, we found the shrine hidden from our view by a
curtain hung between two magnificent trees. Beneath the trees a flat
projection of rock jutted out, and formed a species of natural
platform. Below this, I stood, in company with my Hindoo friends.

Looking back down the hill, the view presented the grandest spectacle
of Nature and Man, in combination, that I have ever seen. The lower
slopes of the eminence melted imperceptibly into a grassy plain, the
place of the meeting of three rivers. On one side, the graceful winding
of the waters stretched away, now visible, now hidden by trees, as far
as the eye could see. On the other, the waveless ocean slept in the
calm of the night. People this lovely scene with tens of thousands of
human creatures, all dressed in white, stretching down the sides of the
hill, overflowing into the plain, and fringing the nearer banks of the
winding rivers. Light this halt of the pilgrims by the wild red flames
of cressets and torches, streaming up at intervals from every part of
the innumerable throng. Imagine the moonlight of the East, pouring in
unclouded glory over all—and you will form some idea of the view that
met me when I looked forth from the summit of the hill.

A strain of plaintive music, played on stringed instruments and flutes,
recalled my attention to the hidden shrine.

I turned, and saw on the rocky platform the figures of three men. In
the central figure of the three I recognised the man to whom I had
spoken in England, when the Indians appeared on the terrace at Lady
Verinder’s house. The other two who had been his companions on that
occasion were no doubt his companions also on this.

One of the spectators, near whom I was standing, saw me start. In a
whisper, he explained to me the apparition of the three figures on the
platform of rock.

They were Brahmins (he said) who had forfeited their caste in the
service of the god. The god had commanded that their purification
should be the purification by pilgrimage. On that night, the three men
were to part. In three separate directions, they were to set forth as
pilgrims to the shrines of India. Never more were they to look on each
other’s faces. Never more were they to rest on their wanderings, from
the day which witnessed their separation, to the day which witnessed
their death.

As those words were whispered to me, the plaintive music ceased. The
three men prostrated themselves on the rock, before the curtain which
hid the shrine. They rose—they looked on one another—they embraced.
Then they descended separately among the people. The people made way
for them in dead silence. In three different directions I saw the crowd
part, at one and the same moment. Slowly the grand white mass of the
people closed together again. The track of the doomed men through the
ranks of their fellow mortals was obliterated. We saw them no more.

A new strain of music, loud and jubilant, rose from the hidden shrine.
The crowd around me shuddered, and pressed together.

The curtain between the trees was drawn aside, and the shrine was
disclosed to view.

There, raised high on a throne—seated on his typical antelope, with his
four arms stretching towards the four corners of the earth—there,
soared above us, dark and awful in the mystic light of heaven, the god
of the Moon. And there, in the forehead of the deity, gleamed the
yellow Diamond, whose splendour had last shone on me in England, from
the bosom of a woman’s dress!

Yes! after the lapse of eight centuries, the Moonstone looks forth once
more, over the walls of the sacred city in which its story first began.
How it has found its way back to its wild native land—by what accident,
or by what crime, the Indians regained possession of their sacred gem,
may be in your knowledge, but is not in mine. You have lost sight of it
in England, and (if I know anything of this people) you have lost sight
of it for ever.

So the years pass, and repeat each other; so the same events revolve in
the cycles of time. What will be the next adventures of the Moonstone?
Who can tell?


FINIS


End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Moonstone, by Wilkie Collins