I

  Tell us, ye Dead, will none of you in pity
  To those you left behind disclose the secret?
  O! That some courteous Ghost would blab it out,
  What 'tis you are, and we must shortly be.
  I've heard that Souls departed have sometimes
  Fore-warned Men of their deaths:
  'Twas kindly done
  To knock, and give the alarum.
                               Blair.


Ambrosio shuddered at himself, when He reflected on his rapid advances
in iniquity.  The enormous crime which He had just committed filled him
with real horror.  The murdered Elvira was continually before his eyes,
and his guilt was already punished by the agonies of his conscience.
Time, however, considerably weakened these impressions:  One day passed
away, another followed it, and still not the least suspicion was thrown
upon him.  Impunity reconciled him to his guilt:  He began to resume
his spirits; and as his fears of detection died away, He paid less
attention to the reproaches of remorse.  Matilda exerted herself to
quiet his alarms.  At the first intelligence of Elvira's death, She
seemed greatly affected, and joined the Monk in deploring the unhappy
catastrophe of his adventure:  But when She found his agitation to be
somewhat calmed, and himself better disposed to listen to her
arguments, She proceeded to mention his offence in milder terms, and
convince him that He was not so highly culpable as He appeared to
consider himself.  She represented that He had only availed himself of
the rights which Nature allows to every one, those of
self-preservation:  That either Elvira or himself must have perished,
and that her inflexibility and resolution to ruin him had deservedly
marked her out for the Victim.  She next stated, that as He had before
rendered himself suspected to Elvira, it was a fortunate event for him
that her lips were closed by death; since without this last adventure,
her suspicions if made public might have produced very disagreeable
consequences.  He had therefore freed himself from an Enemy, to whom
the errors of his conduct were sufficiently known to make her
dangerous, and who was the greatest obstacle to his designs upon
Antonia.  Those designs She encouraged him not to abandon.  She assured
him that, no longer protected by her Mother's watchful eye, the
Daughter would fall an easy conquest; and by praising and enumerating
Antonia's charms, She strove to rekindle the desires of the Monk.  In
this endeavour She succeeded but too well.

As if the crimes into which his passion had seduced him had only
increased its violence, He longed more eagerly than ever to enjoy
Antonia.  The same success in concealing his present guilt, He trusted
would attend his future.  He was deaf to the murmurs of conscience, and
resolved to satisfy his desires at any price.  He waited only for an
opportunity of repeating his former enterprize; But to procure that
opportunity by the same means was now impracticable.  In the first
transports of despair He had dashed the enchanted Myrtle into a
thousand pieces:  Matilda told him plainly that He must expect no
further assistance from the infernal Powers unless He was willing to
subscribe to their established conditions.  This Ambrosio was
determined not to do: He persuaded himself that however great might be
his iniquity, so long as he preserved his claim to salvation, He need
not despair of pardon.  He therefore resolutely refused to enter into
any bond or compact with the Fiends; and Matilda finding him obstinate
upon this point, forbore to press him further.  She exerted her
invention to discover some means of putting Antonia into the Abbot's
power:  Nor was it long before that means presented itself.

While her ruin was thus meditating, the unhappy Girl herself suffered
severely from the loss of her Mother.  Every morning on waking, it was
her first care to hasten to Elvira's chamber.  On that which followed
Ambrosio's fatal visit, She woke later than was her usual custom: Of
this She was convinced by the Abbey Chimes.  She started from her bed,
threw on a few loose garments hastily, and was speeding to enquire how
her Mother had passed the night, when her foot struck against something
which lay in her passage.  She looked down.  What was her horror at
recognizing Elvira's livid Corse!  She uttered a loud shriek, and threw
herself upon the floor.  She clasped the inanimate form to her bosom,
felt that it was dead-cold, and with a movement of disgust, of which
She was not the Mistress, let it fall again from her arms.  The cry had
alarmed Flora, who hastened to her assistance.  The sight which She
beheld penetrated her with horror; but her alarm was more audible than
Antonia's.  She made the House ring with her lamentations, while her
Mistress, almost suffocated with grief, could only mark her distress by
sobs and groans.  Flora's shrieks soon reached the ears of the Hostess,
whose terror and surprize were excessive on learning the cause of this
disturbance.  A Physician was immediately sent for:  But on the first
moment of beholding the Corse, He declared that Elvira's recovery was
beyond the power of art.  He proceeded therefore to give his assistance
to Antonia, who by this time was truly in need of it.  She was conveyed
to bed, while the Landlady busied herself in giving orders for Elvira's
Burial.  Dame Jacintha was a plain good kind of Woman, charitable,
generous, and devout:  But her intellects were weak, and She was a
Miserable Slave to fear and superstition.  She shuddered at the idea of
passing the night in the same House with a dead Body: She was persuaded
that Elvira's Ghost would appear to her, and no less certain that such
a visit would kill her with fright.  From this persuasion, She resolved
to pass the night at a Neighbour's, and insisted that the Funeral
should take place the next day. St. Clare's Cemetery being the nearest,
it was determined that Elvira should be buried there.  Dame Jacintha
engaged to defray every expence attending the burial.  She knew not in
what circumstances Antonia was left, but from the sparing manner in
which the Family had lived, She concluded them to be indifferent.

Consequently, She entertained very little hope of ever being
recompensed; But this consideration prevented her not from taking care
that the Interment was performed with decency, and from showing the
unfortunate Antonia all possible respect.

Nobody dies of mere grief; Of this Antonia was an instance. Aided by
her youth and healthy constitution, She shook off the malady which her
Mother's death had occasioned; But it was not so easy to remove the
disease of her mind.  Her eyes were constantly filled with tears: Every
trifle affected her, and She evidently nourished in her bosom a
profound and rooted melancholy.  The slightest mention of Elvira, the
most trivial circumstance recalling that beloved Parent to her memory,
was sufficient to throw her into serious agitation.  How much would her
grief have been increased, had She known the agonies which terminated
her Mother's existence!  But of this no one entertained the least
suspicion.  Elvira was subject to strong convulsions:  It was supposed
that, aware of their approach, She had dragged herself to her
Daughter's chamber in hopes of assistance; that a sudden access of her
fits had seized her, too violent to be resisted by her already
enfeebled state of health; and that She had expired ere She had time to
reach the medicine which generally relieved her, and which stood upon a
shelf in Antonia's room.  This idea was firmly credited by the few
people, who interested themselves about Elvira:  Her Death was esteemed
a natural event, and soon forgotten by all save by her, who had but too
much reason to deplore her loss.

In truth Antonia's situation was sufficiently embarrassing and
unpleasant.  She was alone in the midst of a dissipated and expensive
City; She was ill provided with money, and worse with Friends.  Her
aunt Leonella was still at Cordova, and She knew not her direction.  Of
the Marquis de las Cisternas She heard no news:  As to Lorenzo, She had
long given up the idea of possessing any interest in his bosom.  She
knew not to whom She could address herself in her present dilemma.  She
wished to consult Ambrosio; But She remembered her Mother's injunctions
to shun him as much as possible, and the last conversation which Elvira
had held with her upon the subject had given her sufficient lights
respecting his designs to put her upon her guard against him in future.
Still all her Mother's warnings could not make her change her good
opinion of the Friar.  She continued to feel that his friendship and
society were requisite to her happiness:  She looked upon his failings
with a partial eye, and could not persuade herself that He really had
intended her ruin.  However, Elvira had positively commanded her to
drop his acquaintance, and She had too much respect for her orders to
disobey them.

At length She resolved to address herself for advice and protection to
the Marquis de las Cisternas, as being her nearest Relation.  She wrote
to him, briefly stating her desolate situation; She besought him to
compassionate his Brother's Child, to continue to her Elvira's pension,
and to authorise her retiring to his old Castle in Murcia, which till
now had been her retreat.  Having sealed her letter, She gave it to the
trusty Flora, who immediately set out to execute her commission.  But
Antonia was born under an unlucky Star.  Had She made her application
to the Marquis but one day sooner, received as his Niece and placed at
the head of his Family, She would have escaped all the misfortunes with
which She was now threatened. Raymond had always intended to execute
this plan:  But first, his hopes of making the proposal to Elvira
through the lips of Agnes, and afterwards, his disappointment at losing
his intended Bride, as well as the severe illness which for some time
had confined him to his Bed, made him defer from day to day the giving
an Asylum in his House to his Brother's Widow.  He had commissioned
Lorenzo to supply her liberally with money:  But Elvira, unwilling to
receive obligations from that Nobleman, had assured him that She needed
no immediate pecuniary assistance. Consequently, the Marquis did not
imagine that a trifling delay on his part could create any
embarrassment; and the distress and agitation of his mind might well
excuse his negligence.

Had He been informed that Elvira's death had left her Daughter
Friendless and unprotected, He would doubtless have taken such
measures, as would have ensured her from every danger:  But Antonia was
not destined to be so fortunate.  The day on which She sent her letter
to the Palace de las Cisternas was that following Lorenzo's departure
from Madrid.  The Marquis was in the first paroxysms of despair at the
conviction that Agnes was indeed no more:  He was delirious, and his
life being in danger, no one was suffered to approach him.  Flora was
informed that He was incapable of attending to Letters, and that
probably a few hours would decide his fate.  With this unsatisfactory
answer She was obliged to return to her Mistress, who now found herself
plunged into greater difficulties than ever.

Flora and Dame Jacintha exerted themselves to console her.  The Latter
begged her to make herself easy, for that as long as She chose to stay
with her, She would treat her like her own Child. Antonia, finding that
the good Woman had taken a real affection for her, was somewhat
comforted by thinking that She had at least one Friend in the World.  A
Letter was now brought to her, directed to Elvira.  She recognized
Leonella's writing, and opening it with joy, found a detailed account
of her Aunt's adventures at Cordova.  She informed her Sister that She
had recovered her Legacy, had lost her heart, and had received in
exchange that of the most amiable of Apothecaries, past, present, and
to come.  She added that She should be at Madrid on the Tuesday night,
and meant to have the pleasure of presenting her Caro Sposo in form.
Though her nuptials were far from pleasing Antonia, Leonella's speedy
return gave her Niece much delight. She rejoiced in thinking that She
should once more be under a Relation's care.  She could not but judge
it to be highly improper, for a young Woman to be living among absolute
Strangers, with no one to regulate her conduct, or protect her from the
insults to which, in her defenceless situation, She was exposed.  She
therefore looked forward with impatience to the Tuesday night.

It arrived.  Antonia listened anxiously to the Carriages, as they
rolled along the Street.  None of them stopped, and it grew late
without Leonella's appearing.  Still, Antonia resolved to sit up till
her Aunt's arrival, and in spite of all her remonstrances, Dame
Jacintha and Flora insisted upon doing the same.  The hours passed on
slow and tediously.  Lorenzo's departure from Madrid had put a stop to
the nightly Serenades:  She hoped in vain to hear the usual sound of
Guitars beneath her window.  She took up her own, and struck a few
chords: But Music that evening had lost its charms for her, and She
soon replaced the Instrument in its case.  She seated herself at her
embroidery frame, but nothing went right: The silks were missing, the
thread snapped every moment, and the needles were so expert at falling
that they seemed to be animated.  At length a flake of wax fell from
the Taper which stood near her upon a favourite wreath of Violets: This
compleatly discomposed her; She threw down her needle, and quitted the
frame.  It was decreed that for that night nothing should have the
power of amusing her.  She was the prey of Ennui, and employed herself
in making fruitless wishes for the arrival of her Aunt.

As She walked with a listless air up and down the chamber, the Door
caught her eye conducting to that which had been her Mother's.  She
remembered that Elvira's little Library was arranged there, and thought
that She might possibly find in it some Book to amuse her till Leonella
should arrive.  Accordingly She took her Taper from the table, passed
through the little Closet, and entered the adjoining apartment.  As She
looked around her, the sight of this room brought to her recollection a
thousand painful ideas.  It was the first time of her entering it since
her Mother's death.  The total silence prevailing through the chamber,
the Bed despoiled of its furniture, the cheerless hearth where stood an
extinguished Lamp, and a few dying Plants in the window which, since
Elvira's loss, had been neglected, inspired Antonia with a melancholy
awe.  The gloom of night gave strength to this sensation.  She placed
her light upon the Table, and sank into a large chair, in which She had
seen her Mother seated a thousand and a thousand times.  She was never
to see her seated there again!  Tears unbidden streamed down her cheek,
and She abandoned herself to the sadness which grew deeper with every
moment.

Ashamed of her weakness, She at length rose from her seat:  She
proceeded to seek for what had brought her to this melancholy scene.
The small collection of Books was arranged upon several shelves in
order.  Antonia examined them without finding any thing likely to
interest her, till She put her hand upon a volume of old Spanish
Ballads.  She read a few Stanzas of one of them: They excited her
curiosity.  She took down the Book, and seated herself to peruse it
with more ease.  She trimmed the Taper, which now drew towards its end,
and then read the following Ballad.

  ALONZO THE BRAVE, AND FAIR IMOGINE

  A Warrior so bold, and a Virgin so bright
  Conversed, as They sat on the green:
  They gazed on each other with tender delight;
  Alonzo the Brave was the name of the Knight,
  The Maid's was the Fair Imogine.

  'And Oh!' said the Youth, 'since to-morrow I go
  To fight in a far distant land,
  Your tears for my absence soon leaving to flow,
  Some Other will court you, and you will bestow
  On a wealthier Suitor your hand.'

  'Oh! hush these suspicions,' Fair Imogine said,
  'Offensive to Love and to me!
  For if ye be living, or if ye be dead,
  I swear by the Virgin, that none in your stead
  Shall Husband of Imogine be.

  'If e'er I by lust or by wealth led aside
  Forget my Alonzo the Brave,
  God grant, that to punish my falsehood and pride
  Your Ghost at the Marriage may sit by my side,
  May tax me with perjury, claim me as Bride,
  And bear me away to the Grave!'

  To Palestine hastened the Hero so bold;
  His Love, She lamented him sore:
  But scarce had a twelve-month elapsed, when behold,
  A Baron all covered with jewels and gold
  Arrived at Fair Imogine's door.

  His treasure, his presents, his spacious domain
  Soon made her untrue to her vows:
  He dazzled her eyes; He bewildered her brain;
  He caught her affections so light and so vain,
  And carried her home as his Spouse.

  And now had the Marriage been blest by the Priest;
  The revelry now was begun:
  The Tables, they groaned with the weight of the Feast;
  Nor yet had the laughter and merriment ceased,
  When the Bell of the Castle told,--'One!'

  Then first with amazement Fair Imogine found
  That a Stranger was placed by her side:  His air was terrific;
  He uttered no sound;  He spoke not, He moved not,
  He looked not around,
  But earnestly gazed on the Bride.

  His vizor was closed, and gigantic his height;
  His armour was sable to view:
  All pleasure and laughter were hushed at his sight;
  The Dogs as They eyed him drew back in affright,
  The Lights in the chamber burned blue!

  His presence all bosoms appeared to dismay;
  The Guests sat in silence and fear.
  At length spoke the Bride, while She trembled;
  'I pray,  Sir Knight, that your Helmet aside you would lay,
  And deign to partake of our chear.'

  The Lady is silent:  The Stranger complies.
  His vizor lie slowly unclosed:
  Oh! God! what a sight met Fair Imogine's eyes!
  What words can express her dismay and surprize,
  When a Skeleton's head was exposed.

  All present then uttered a terrified shout;
  All turned with disgust from the scene.
  The worms, They crept in, and the worms, They crept out,
  And sported his eyes and his temples about,
  While the Spectre addressed Imogine.

  'Behold me, Thou false one! Behold me!' He cried;
  'Remember Alonzo the Brave!
  God grants, that to punish thy falsehood and pride
  My Ghost at thy marriage should sit by thy side,
  Should tax thee with perjury, claim thee as Bride
  And bear thee away to the Grave!'

  Thus saying, his arms round the Lady He wound,
  While loudly She shrieked in dismay;
  Then sank with his prey through the wide-yawning ground:
  Nor ever again was Fair Imogine found,
  Or the Spectre who bore her away.

  Not long lived the Baron; and none since that time
  To inhabit the Castle presume:
  For Chronicles tell, that by order sublime
  There Imogine suffers the pain of her crime,
  And mourns her deplorable doom.

  At midnight four times in each year does her Spright
  When Mortals in slumber are bound,
  Arrayed in her bridal apparel of white,
  Appear in the Hall with the Skeleton-Knight,
  And shriek, as He whirls her around.

  While They drink out of skulls newly torn from the grave,
  Dancing round them the Spectres are seen:
  Their liquor is blood, and this horrible Stave
  They howl.--'To the health of Alonzo the Brave,
  And his Consort, the False Imogine!'


The perusal of this story was ill-calculated to dispel Antonia's
melancholy.  She had naturally a strong inclination to the marvellous;
and her Nurse, who believed firmly in Apparitions, had related to her
when an Infant so many horrible adventures of this kind, that all
Elvira's attempts had failed to eradicate their impressions from her
Daughter's mind.  Antonia still nourished a superstitious prejudice in
her bosom:  She was often susceptible of terrors which, when She
discovered their natural and insignificant cause, made her blush at her
own weakness. With such a turn of mind, the adventure which She had
just been reading sufficed to give her apprehensions the alarm.  The
hour and the scene combined to authorize them.  It was the dead of
night: She was alone, and in the chamber once occupied by her deceased
Mother.  The weather was comfortless and stormy:  The wind howled
around the House, the doors rattled in their frames, and the heavy rain
pattered against the windows.  No other sound was heard.  The Taper,
now burnt down to the socket, sometimes flaring upwards shot a gleam of
light through the room, then sinking again seemed upon the point of
expiring.  Antonia's heart throbbed with agitation:  Her eyes wandered
fearfully over the objects around her, as the trembling flame
illuminated them at intervals.  She attempted to rise from her seat;
But her limbs trembled so violently that She was unable to proceed.
She then called Flora, who was in a room at no great distance:  But
agitation choaked her voice, and her cries died away in hollow murmurs.

She passed some minutes in this situation, after which her terrors
began to diminish.  She strove to recover herself, and acquire strength
enough to quit the room: Suddenly She fancied, that She heard a low
sigh drawn near her.  This idea brought back her former weakness.  She
had already raised herself from her seat, and was on the point of
taking the Lamp from the Table. The imaginary noise stopped her:  She
drew back her hand, and supported herself upon the back of a Chair.
She listened anxiously, but nothing more was heard.

'Gracious God!' She said to herself; 'What could be that sound? Was I
deceived, or did I really hear it?'

Her reflections were interrupted by a noise at the door scarcely
audible:  It seemed as if somebody was whispering.  Antonia's alarm
increased:  Yet the Bolt She knew to be fastened, and this idea in some
degree reassured her.  Presently the Latch was lifted up softly, and
the Door moved with caution backwards and forwards.  Excess of terror
now supplied Antonia with that strength, of which She had till then
been deprived.  She started from her place and made towards the Closet
door, whence She might soon have reached the chamber where She expected
to find Flora and Dame Jacintha.  Scarcely had She reached the middle
of the room when the Latch was lifted up a second time.  An involuntary
movement obliged her to turn her head.  Slowly and gradually the Door
turned upon its hinges, and standing upon the Threshold She beheld a
tall thin Figure, wrapped in a white shroud which covered it from head
to foot.

This vision arrested her feet:  She remained as if petrified in the
middle of the apartment.  The Stranger with measured and solemn steps
drew near the Table.  The dying Taper darted a blue and melancholy
flame as the Figure advanced towards it.  Over the Table was fixed a
small Clock; The hand of it was upon the stroke of three.  The Figure
stopped opposite to the Clock:  It raised its right arm, and pointed to
the hour, at the same time looking earnestly upon Antonia, who waited
for the conclusion of this scene, motionless and silent.

The figure remained in this posture for some moments. The clock struck.
When the sound had ceased, the Stranger advanced yet a few steps nearer
Antonia.

'Yet three days,' said a voice faint, hollow, and sepulchral; 'Yet
three days, and we meet again!'

Antonia shuddered at the words.

'We meet again?' She pronounced at length with difficulty: 'Where shall
we meet?  Whom shall I meet?'

The figure pointed to the ground with one hand, and with the other
raised the Linen which covered its face.

'Almighty God! My Mother!'

Antonia shrieked, and fell lifeless upon the floor.

Dame Jacintha who was at work in a neighbouring chamber, was alarmed by
the cry:  Flora was just gone down stairs to fetch fresh oil for the
Lamp, by which they had been sitting.  Jacintha therefore hastened
alone to Antonia's assistance, and great was her amazement to find her
extended upon the floor.  She raised her in her arms, conveyed her to
her apartment, and placed her upon the Bed still senseless.  She then
proceeded to bathe her temples, chafe her hands, and use all possible
means of bringing her to herself.  With some difficulty She succeeded.
Antonia opened her eyes, and looked round her wildly.

'Where is She?' She cried in a trembling voice; 'Is She gone?  Am I
safe?  Speak to me!  Comfort me!  Oh! speak to me for God's sake!'

'Safe from whom, my Child?' replied the astonished Jacintha; 'What
alarms you?  Of whom are you afraid?'

'In three days! She told me that we should meet in three days!  I heard
her say it!  I saw her, Jacintha, I saw her but this moment!'

She threw herself upon Jacintha's bosom.

'You saw her?  Saw whom?'

'My Mother's Ghost!'

'Christ Jesus!' cried Jacintha, and starting from the Bed, let fall
Antonia upon the pillow, and fled in consternation out of the room.

As She hastened down stairs, She met Flora ascending them.

'Go to your Mistress, Flora,' said She; 'Here are rare doings! Oh! I am
the most unfortunate Woman alive!  My House is filled with Ghosts and
dead Bodies, and the Lord knows what besides; Yet I am sure, nobody
likes such company less than I do.  But go your way to Donna Antonia,
Flora, and let me go mine.'

Thus saying, She continued her course to the Street door, which She
opened, and without allowing herself time to throw on her veil, She
made the best of her way to the Capuchin Abbey.  In the meanwhile,
Flora hastened to her Lady's chamber, equally surprized and alarmed at
Jacintha's consternation.  She found Antonia lying upon the bed
insensible.  She used the same means for her recovery that Jacintha had
already employed; But finding that her Mistress only recovered from one
fit to fall into another, She sent in all haste for a Physician.  While
expecting his arrival, She undrest Antonia, and conveyed her to Bed.

Heedless of the storm, terrified almost out of her senses, Jacintha ran
through the Streets, and stopped not till She reached the Gate of the
Abbey.  She rang loudly at the bell, and as soon as the Porter
appeared, She desired permission to speak to the Superior.  Ambrosio
was then conferring with Matilda upon the means of procuring access to
Antonia.  The cause of Elvira's death remaining unknown, He was
convinced that crimes were not so swiftly followed by punishment, as
his Instructors the Monks had taught him, and as till then He had
himself believed.  This persuasion made him resolve upon Antonia's
ruin, for the enjoyment of whose person dangers and difficulties only
seemed to have increased his passion.  The Monk had already made one
attempt to gain admission to her presence; But Flora had refused him in
such a manner as to convince him that all future endeavours must be
vain.  Elvira had confided her suspicions to that trusty Servant:  She
had desired her never to leave Ambrosio alone with her Daughter, and if
possible to prevent their meeting altogether.  Flora promised to obey
her, and had executed her orders to the very letter.  Ambrosio's visit
had been rejected that morning, though Antonia was ignorant of it.  He
saw that to obtain a sight of his Mistress by open means was out of the
question; and both Himself and Matilda had consumed the night, in
endeavouring to invent some plan, whose event might be more successful.
Such was their employment, when a Lay-Brother entered the Abbot's Cell,
and informed him that a Woman calling herself Jacintha Zuniga requested
audience for a few minutes.

Ambrosio was by no means disposed to grant the petition of his Visitor.
He refused it positively, and bad the Lay-Brother tell the Stranger to
return the next day.  Matilda interrupted him.

'See this Woman,' said She in a low voice; 'I have my reasons.'

The Abbot obeyed her, and signified that He would go to the Parlour
immediately.  With this answer the Lay-Brother withdrew.  As soon as
they were alone Ambrosio enquired why Matilda wished him to see this
Jacintha.

'She is Antonia's Hostess,' replied Matilda; 'She may possibly be of
use to you:  but let us examine her, and learn what brings her hither.'

They proceeded together to the Parlour, where Jacintha was already
waiting for the Abbot.  She had conceived a great opinion of his piety
and virtue; and supposing him to have much influence over the Devil,
thought that it must be an easy matter for him to lay Elvira's Ghost in
the Red Sea.  Filled with this persuasion She had hastened to the
Abbey.  As soon as She saw the Monk enter the Parlour, She dropped upon
her knees, and began her story as follows.

'Oh!  Reverend Father!  Such an accident!  Such an adventure! I know
not what course to take, and unless you can help me, I shall certainly
go distracted.  Well, to be sure, never was Woman so unfortunate, as
myself!  All in my power to keep clear of such abomination have I done,
and yet that all is too little.  What signifies my telling my beads
four times a day, and observing every fast prescribed by the Calendar?
What signifies my having made three Pilgrimages to St. James of
Compostella, and purchased as many pardons from the Pope as would buy
off Cain's punishment?  Nothing prospers with me!  All goes wrong, and
God only knows, whether any thing will ever go right again!  Why now,
be your Holiness the Judge.  My Lodger dies in convulsions; Out of pure
kindness I bury her at my own expence; (Not that She is any Relation of
mine, or that I shall be benefited a single pistole by her death:  I
got nothing by it, and therefore you know, reverend Father, that her
living or dying was just the same to me.  But that is nothing to the
purpose; To return to what I was saying,) I took care of her funeral,
had every thing performed decently and properly, and put myself to
expence enough, God knows!  And how do you think the Lady repays me for
my kindness?  Why truly by refusing to sleep quietly in her comfortable
deal Coffin, as a peaceable well-disposed Spirit ought to do, and
coming to plague me, who never wish to set eyes on her again.
Forsooth, it well becomes her to go racketing about my House at
midnight, popping into her Daughter's room through the Keyhole, and
frightening the poor Child out of her wits!  Though She be a Ghost, She
might be more civil than to bolt into a Person's House, who likes her
company so little.  But as for me, reverend Father, the plain state of
the case is this: If She walks into my House, I must walk out of it,
for I cannot abide such Visitors, not I!  Thus you see, your Sanctity,
that without your assistance I am ruined and undone for ever.  I shall
be obliged to quit my House; Nobody will take it, when 'tis known that
She haunts it, and then I shall find myself in a fine situation!
Miserable Woman that I am!  What shall I do!  What will become of me!'

Here She wept bitterly, wrung her hands, and begged to know the Abbot's
opinion of her case.

'In truth, good Woman,' replied He, 'It will be difficult for me to
relieve you without knowing what is the matter with you.  You have
forgotten to tell me what has happened, and what it is you want.'

'Let me die' cried Jacintha, 'but your Sanctity is in the right! This
then is the fact stated briefly.  A lodger of mine is lately dead, a
very good sort of Woman that I must needs say for her as far as my
knowledge of her went, though that was not a great way:

She kept me too much at a distance; for indeed She was given to be upon
the high ropes, and whenever I ventured to speak to her, She had a look
with her which always made me feel a little queerish, God forgive me
for saying so.  However, though She was more stately than needful, and
affected to look down upon me (Though if I am well informed, I come of
as good Parents as She could do for her ears, for her Father was a
Shoe-maker at Cordova, and Mine was an Hatter at Madrid, aye, and a
very creditable Hatter too, let me tell you,) Yet for all her pride,
She was a quiet well-behaved Body, and I never wish to have a better
Lodger.  This makes me wonder the more at her not sleeping quietly in
her Grave:  But there is no trusting to people in this world!  For my
part, I never saw her do amiss, except on the Friday before her death.
To be sure, I was then much scandalized by seeing her eat the wing of a
Chicken! "How, Madona Flora!" quoth I; (Flora, may it please your
Reverence, is the name of the waiting Maid)--"How, Madona Flora!"
quoth I; "Does your Mistress eat flesh upon Fridays?  Well!  Well!
See the event, and then remember that Dame Jacintha warned you of it!"
These were my very words, but Alas!  I might as well have held my
tongue!  Nobody minded me; and Flora, who is somewhat pert and
snappish, (More is the pity, say I) told me that there was no more harm
in eating a Chicken than the egg from which it came. Nay, She even
declared that if her Lady added a slice of bacon, She would not be an
inch nearer Damnation, God protect us!  A poor ignorant sinful soul!  I
protest to your Holiness, I trembled to hear her utter such
blasphemies, and expected every moment to see the ground open and
swallow her up, Chicken and all!  For you must know, worshipful Father,
that while She talked thus, She held the plate in her hand, on which
lay the identical roast Fowl.  And a fine Bird it was, that I must say
for it! Done to a turn, for I superintended the cooking of it myself:
It was a little Gallician of my own raising, may it please your
Holiness, and the flesh was as white as an egg-shell, as indeed Donna
Elvira told me herself. "Dame Jacintha," said She, very
good-humouredly, though to say the truth, She was always very polite to
me .....'

Here Ambrosio's patience failed him.  Eager to know Jacintha's business
in which Antonia seemed to be concerned, He was almost distracted while
listening to the rambling of this prosing old Woman.  He interrupted
her, and protested that if She did not immediately tell her story and
have done with it, He should quit the Parlour, and leave her to get out
of her difficulties by herself.  This threat had the desired effect.
Jacintha related her business in as few words as She could manage; But
her account was still so prolix that Ambrosio had need of his patience
to bear him to the conclusion.

'And so, your Reverence,' said She, after relating Elvira's death and
burial, with all their circumstances; 'And so, your Reverence, upon
hearing the shriek, I put away my work, and away posted I to Donna
Antonia's chamber.  Finding nobody there, I past on to the next; But I
must own, I was a little timorous at going in, for this was the very
room where Donna Elvira used to sleep.  However, in I went, and sure
enough, there lay the young Lady at full length upon the floor, as cold
as a stone, and as white as a sheet.  I was surprized at this, as your
Holiness may well suppose; But Oh me! how I shook when I saw a great
tall figure at my elbow whose head touched the ceiling!  The face was
Donna Elvira's, I must confess; But out of its mouth came clouds of
fire, its arms were loaded with heavy chains which it rattled
piteously, and every hair on its head was a Serpent as big as my arm!
At this I was frightened enough, and began to say my Ave-Maria:  But
the Ghost interrupting me uttered three loud groans, and roared out in
a terrible voice, "Oh! That Chicken's wing!  My poor soul suffers for
it!"  As soon as She had said this, the Ground opened, the Spectre
sank down, I heard a clap of thunder, and the room was filled with a
smell of brimstone.  When I recovered from my fright, and had brought
Donna Antonia to herself, who told me that She had cried out upon
seeing her Mother's Ghost, (And well might She cry, poor Soul!  Had I
been in her place, I should have cried ten times louder) it directly
came into my head, that if any one had power to quiet this Spectre, it
must be your Reverence.  So hither I came in all diligence, to beg that
you will sprinkle my House with holy water, and lay the Apparition in
the Red Sea.'

Ambrosio stared at this strange story, which He could not credit.

'Did Donna Antonia also see the Ghost?' said He.

'As plain as I see you, Reverend Father!'

Ambrosio paused for a moment.  Here was an opportunity offered him of
gaining access to Antonia, but He hesitated to employ it. The
reputation which He enjoyed in Madrid was still dear to him; and since
He had lost the reality of virtue, it appeared as if its semblance was
become more valuable.  He was conscious that publicly to break through
the rule never to quit the Abbey precincts, would derogate much from
his supposed austerity. In visiting Elvira, He had always taken care to
keep his features concealed from the Domestics.  Except by the Lady,
her Daughter, and the faithful Flora, He was known in the Family by no
other name than that of Father Jerome.  Should He comply with
Jacintha's request, and accompany her to her House, He knew that the
violation of his rule could not be kept a secret.  However, his
eagerness to see Antonia obtained the victory: He even hoped, that the
singularity of this adventure would justify him in the eyes of Madrid:
But whatever might be the consequences, He resolved to profit by the
opportunity which chance had presented to him.  An expressive look from
Matilda confirmed him in this resolution.

'Good Woman,' said He to Jacintha, 'what you tell me is so
extraordinary that I can scarcely credit your assertions. However, I
will comply with your request.  Tomorrow after Matins you may expect me
at your House:  I will then examine into what I can do for you, and if
it is in my power, will free you from this unwelcome Visitor.  Now then
go home, and peace be with you!'

'Home?' exclaimed Jacintha; 'I go home?  Not I by my troth! except
under your protection, I set no foot of mine within the threshold.  God
help me, the Ghost may meet me upon the Stairs, and whisk me away with
her to the devil!  Oh!  That I had accepted young Melchior Basco's
offer!  Then I should have had somebody to protect me; But now I am a
lone Woman, and meet with nothing but crosses and misfortunes!  Thank
Heaven, it is not yet too late to repent!  There is Simon Gonzalez will
have me any day of the week, and if I live till daybreak, I will marry
him out of hand:  An Husband I will have, that is determined, for now
this Ghost is once in my House, I shall be frightened out of my wits to
sleep alone.  But for God's sake, reverend Father, come with me now. I
shall have no rest till the House is purified, or the poor young Lady
either.  The dear Girl!  She is in a piteous taking:  I left her in
strong convulsions, and I doubt, She will not easily recover her
fright.'

The Friar started, and interrupted her hastily.

'In convulsions, say you?  Antonia in convulsions?  Lead on, good
Woman!  I follow you this moment!'

Jacintha insisted upon his stopping to furnish himself with the vessel
of holy water:  With this request He complied.  Thinking herself safe
under his protection should a Legion of Ghosts attack her, the old
Woman returned the Monk a profusion of thanks, and they departed
together for the Strada di San Iago.

So strong an impression had the Spectre made upon Antonia, that for the
first two or three hours the Physician declared her life to be in
danger.  The fits at length becoming less frequent induced him to alter
his opinion.  He said that to keep her quiet was all that was
necessary; and He ordered a medicine to be prepared which would
tranquillize her nerves, and procure her that repose which at present
She much wanted.  The sight of Ambrosio, who now appeared with Jacintha
at her Bedside, contributed essentially to compose her ruffled spirits.
Elvira had not sufficiently explained herself upon the nature of his
designs, to make a Girl so ignorant of the world as her Daughter aware
how dangerous was his acquaintance.  At this moment, when penetrated
with horror at the scene which had just past, and dreading to
contemplate the Ghost's prediction, her mind had need of all the
succours of friendship and religion, Antonia regarded the Abbot with an
eye doubly partial.  That strong prepossession in his favour still
existed which She had felt for him at first sight:  She fancied, yet
knew not wherefore, that his presence was a safeguard to her from every
danger, insult, or misfortune.

She thanked him gratefully for his visit, and related to him the
adventure, which had alarmed her so seriously.

The Abbot strove to reassure her, and convince her that the whole had
been a deception of her overheated fancy.  The solitude in which She
had passed the Evening, the gloom of night, the Book which She had been
reading, and the Room in which She sat, were all calculated to place
before her such a vision.  He treated the idea of Ghosts with ridicule,
and produced strong arguments to prove the fallacy of such a system.
His conversation tranquillized and comforted her, but did not convince
her.  She could not believe that the Spectre had been a mere creature
of her imagination; Every circumstance was impressed upon her mind too
forcibly, to permit her flattering herself with such an idea.  She
persisted in asserting that She had really seen her Mother's Ghost, had
heard the period of her dissolution announced and declared that She
never should quit her bed alive.  Ambrosio advised her against
encouraging these sentiments, and then quitted her chamber, having
promised to repeat his visit on the morrow.  Antonia received this
assurance with every mark of joy:  But the Monk easily perceived that
He was not equally acceptable to her Attendant.  Flora obeyed Elvira's
injunctions with the most scrupulous observance.  She examined every
circumstance with an anxious eye likely in the least to prejudice her
young Mistress, to whom She had been attached for many years.  She was
a Native of Cuba, had followed Elvira to Spain, and loved the young
Antonia with a Mother's affection.  Flora quitted not the room for a
moment while the Abbot remained there:  She watched his every word, his
every look, his every action.  He saw that her suspicious eye was
always fixed upon him, and conscious that his designs would not bear
inspection so minute, He felt frequently confused and disconcerted.  He
was aware that She doubted the purity of his intentions; that She would
never leave him alone with Antonia, and his Mistress defended by the
presence of this vigilant Observer, He despaired of finding the means
to gratify his passion.

As He quitted the House, Jacintha met him, and begged that some Masses
might be sung for the repose of Elvira's soul, which She doubted not
was suffering in Purgatory.  He promised not to forget her request; But
He perfectly gained the old Woman's heart by engaging to watch during
the whole of the approaching night in the haunted chamber.  Jacintha
could find no terms sufficiently strong to express her gratitude, and
the Monk departed loaded with her benedictions.

It was broad day when He returned to the Abbey.  His first care was to
communicate what had past to his Confident.  He felt too sincere a
passion for Antonia to have heard unmoved the prediction of her speedy
death, and He shuddered at the idea of losing an object so dear to him.
Upon this head Matilda reassured him.  She confirmed the arguments
which Himself had already used:  She declared Antonia to have been
deceived by the wandering of her brain, by the Spleen which opprest her
at the moment, and by the natural turn of her mind to superstition, and
the marvellous.  As to Jacintha's account, the absurdity refuted
itself; The Abbot hesitated not to believe that She had fabricated the
whole story, either confused by terror, or hoping to make him comply
more readily with her request.  Having overruled the Monk's
apprehensions, Matilda continued thus.

'The prediction and the Ghost are equally false; But it must be your
care, Ambrosio, to verify the first. Antonia within three days must
indeed be dead to the world; But She must live for you.

Her present illness, and this fancy which She has taken into her head,
will colour a plan which I have long meditated, but which was
impracticable without your procuring access to Antonia.  She shall be
yours, not for a single night, but for ever.  All the vigilance of her
Duenna shall not avail her:  You shall riot unrestrained in the charms
of your Mistress.  This very day must the scheme be put in execution,
for you have no time to lose. The Nephew of the Duke of Medina Celi
prepares to demand Antonia for his Bride:  In a few days She will be
removed to the Palace of her Relation, the Marquis de las Cisternas,
and there She will be secure from your attempts.  Thus during your
absence have I been informed by my Spies, who are ever employed in
bringing me intelligence for your service.  Now then listen to me.
There is a juice extracted from certain herbs, known but to few, which
brings on the Person who drinks it the exact image of Death.  Let this
be administered to Antonia:  You may easily find means to pour a few
drops into her medicine.  The effect will be throwing her into strong
convulsions for an hour:  After which her blood will gradually cease to
flow, and heart to beat; A mortal paleness will spread itself over her
features, and She will appear a Corse to every eye.  She has no Friends
about her:  You may charge yourself unsuspected with the
superintendence of her funeral, and cause her to be buried in the
Vaults of St. Clare. Their solitude and easy access render these
Caverns favourable to your designs.  Give Antonia the soporific draught
this Evening: Eight and forty hours after She has drank it, Life will
revive to her bosom.  She will then be absolutely in your power:  She
will find all resistance unavailing, and necessity will compel her to
receive you in her arms.'

'Antonia will be in my power!' exclaimed the Monk; 'Matilda, you
transport me!  At length then, happiness will be mine, and that
happiness will be Matilda's gift, will be the gift of friendship!

I shall clasp Antonia in my arms, far from every prying eye, from every
tormenting Intruder!  I shall sigh out my soul upon her bosom; Shall
teach her young heart the first rudiments of pleasure, and revel
uncontrouled in the endless variety of her charms!  And shall this
delight indeed by mine?  Shall I give the reins to my desires, and
gratify every wild tumultuous wish?  Oh! Matilda, how can I express to
you my gratitude?'

'By profiting by my counsels.  Ambrosio, I live but to serve you:

Your interest and happiness are equally mine. Be your person Antonia's,
but to your friendship and your heart I still assert my claim.
Contributing to yours forms now my only pleasure. Should my exertions
procure the gratification of your wishes, I shall consider my trouble
to be amply repaid.  But let us lose no time.  The liquor of which I
spoke is only to be found in St. Clare's Laboratory.  Hasten then to
the Prioress; Request of her admission to the Laboratory, and it will
not be denied. There is a Closet at the lower end of the great Room,
filled with liquids of different colours and qualities.  The Bottle in
question stands by itself upon the third shelf on the left.  It
contains a greenish liquor:  Fill a small phial with it when you are
unobserved, and Antonia is your own.'

The Monk hesitated not to adopt this infamous plan.  His desires, but
too violent before, had acquired fresh vigour from the sight of
Antonia.  As He sat by her bedside, accident had discovered to him some
of those charms which till then had been concealed from him: He found
them even more perfect, than his ardent imagination had pictured them.
Sometimes her white and polished arm was displayed in arranging the
pillow: Sometimes a sudden movement discovered part of her swelling
bosom:  But whereever the new-found charm presented itself, there
rested the Friar's gloting eyes.  Scarcely could He master himself
sufficiently to conceal his desires from Antonia and her vigilant
Duenna. Inflamed by the remembrance of these beauties, He entered into
Matilda's scheme without hesitation.

No sooner were Matins over than He bent his course towards the Convent
of St. Clare:  His arrival threw the whole Sisterhood into the utmost
amazement.  The Prioress was sensible of the honour done her Convent by
his paying it his first visit, and strove to express her gratitude by
every possible attention.  He was paraded through the Garden, shown all
the reliques of Saints and Martyrs, and treated with as much respect
and distinction as had He been the Pope himself.  On his part, Ambrosio
received the Domina's civilities very graciously, and strove to remove
her surprize at his having broken through his resolution.  He stated,
that among his penitents, illness prevented many from quitting their
Houses.  These were exactly the People who most needed his advice and
the comforts of Religion:  Many representations had been made to him
upon this account, and though highly repugnant to his own wishes, He
had found it absolutely necessary for the service of heaven to change
his determination, and quit his beloved retirement.  The Prioress
applauded his zeal in his profession and his charity towards Mankind:
She declared that Madrid was happy in possessing a Man so perfect and
irreproachable.  In such discourse, the Friar at length reached the
Laboratory.  He found the Closet: The Bottle stood in the place which
Matilda had described, and the Monk seized an opportunity to fill his
phial unobserved with the soporific liquor.  Then having partaken of a
Collation in the Refectory, He retired from the Convent pleased with
the success of his visit, and leaving the Nuns delighted by the honour
conferred upon them.

He waited till Evening before He took the road to Antonia's dwelling.
Jacintha welcomed him with transport, and besought him not to forget
his promise to pass the night in the haunted Chamber:  That promise He
now repeated.  He found Antonia tolerably well, but still harping upon
the Ghost's prediction. Flora moved not from her Lady's Bed, and by
symptoms yet stronger than on the former night testified her dislike to
the Abbot's presence.  Still Ambrosio affected not to observe them.
The Physician arrived, while He was conversing with Antonia.  It was
dark already; Lights were called for, and Flora was compelled to
descend for them herself.  However, as She left a third Person in the
room, and expected to be absent but a few minutes, She believed that
She risqued nothing in quitting her post.  No sooner had She left the
room, than Ambrosio moved towards the Table, on which stood Antonia's
medicine:  It was placed in a recess of the window.  The Physician
seated in an armed-chair, and employed in questioning his Patient, paid
no attention to the proceedings of the Monk.  Ambrosio seized the
opportunity:  He drew out the fatal Phial, and let a few drops fall
into the medicine.  He then hastily left the Table, and returned to the
seat which He had quitted.  When Flora made her appearance with lights,
every thing seemed to be exactly as She had left it.

The Physician declared that Antonia might quit her chamber the next day
with perfect safety.  He recommended her following the same
prescription which, on the night before, had procured her a refreshing
sleep: Flora replied that the draught stood ready upon the Table:  He
advised the Patient to take it without delay, and then retired.  Flora
poured the medicine into a Cup and presented it to her Mistress.  At
that moment Ambrosio's courage failed him.  Might not Matilda have
deceived him?  Might not Jealousy have persuaded her to destroy her
Rival, and substitute poison in the room of an opiate?  This idea
appeared so reasonable that He was on the point of preventing her from
swallowing the medicine.  His resolution was adopted too late: The Cup
was already emptied, and Antonia restored it into Flora's hands.  No
remedy was now to be found:  Ambrosio could only expect the moment
impatiently, destined to decide upon Antonia's life or death, upon his
own happiness or despair.

Dreading to create suspicion by his stay, or betray himself by his
mind's agitation, He took leave of his Victim, and withdrew from the
room.  Antonia parted from him with less cordiality than on the former
night.  Flora had represented to her Mistress that to admit his visits
was to disobey her Mother's orders:  She described to her his emotion
on entering the room, and the fire which sparkled in his eyes while He
gazed upon her.  This had escaped Antonia's observation, but not her
Attendant's; Who explaining the Monk's designs and their probable
consequences in terms much clearer than Elvira's, though not quite so
delicate, had succeeded in alarming her young Lady, and persuading her
to treat him more distantly than She had done hitherto.  The idea of
obeying her Mother's will at once determined Antonia.  Though She
grieved at losing his society, She conquered herself sufficiently to
receive the Monk with some degree of reserve and coldness. She thanked
him with respect and gratitude for his former visits, but did not
invite his repeating them in future.  It now was not the Friar's
interest to solicit admission to her presence, and He took leave of her
as if not designing to return.  Fully persuaded that the acquaintance
which She dreaded was now at an end, Flora was so much worked upon by
his easy compliance that She began to doubt the justice of her
suspicions.  As She lighted him down Stairs, She thanked him for having
endeavoured to root out from Antonia's mind her superstitious terrors
of the Spectre's prediction:  She added, that as He seemed interested
in Donna Antonia's welfare, should any change take place in her
situation, She would be careful to let him know it.  The Monk in
replying took pains to raise his voice, hoping that Jacintha would hear
it.  In this He succeeded; As He reached the foot of the Stairs with
his Conductress, the Landlady failed not to make her appearance.

'Why surely you are not going away, reverend Father?' cried She; 'Did
you not promise to pass the night in the haunted Chamber? Christ Jesus!
I shall be left alone with the Ghost, and a fine pickle I shall be in
by morning!  Do all I could, say all I could, that obstinate old Brute,
Simon Gonzalez, refused to marry me today; And before tomorrow comes, I
suppose, I shall be torn to pieces, by the Ghosts, and Goblins, and
Devils, and what not! For God's sake, your Holiness, do not leave me in
such a woeful condition!  On my bended knees I beseech you to keep your
promise:  Watch this night in the haunted chamber; Lay the Apparition
in the Red Sea, and Jacintha remembers you in her prayers to the last
day of her existence!'

This request Ambrosio expected and desired; Yet He affected to raise
objections, and to seem unwilling to keep his word.  He told Jacintha
that the Ghost existed nowhere but in her own brain, and that her
insisting upon his staying all night in the House was ridiculous and
useless.  Jacintha was obstinate:  She was not to be convinced, and
pressed him so urgently not to leave her a prey to the Devil, that at
length He granted her request. All this show of resistance imposed not
upon Flora, who was naturally of a suspicious temper.  She suspected
the Monk to be acting a part very contrary to his own inclinations, and
that He wished for no better than to remain where He was.  She even
went so far as to believe that Jacintha was in his interest; and the
poor old Woman was immediately set down, as no better than a Procuress.
While She applauded herself for having penetrated into this plot
against her Lady's honour, She resolved in secret to render it
fruitless.

'So then,' said She to the Abbot with a look half-satirical and half
indignant; 'So then you mean to stay here tonight?  Do so, in God's
name!  Nobody will prevent you.  Sit up to watch for the Ghost's
arrival:  I shall sit up too, and the Lord grant that I may see nothing
worse than a Ghost!  I quit not Donna Antonia's Bedside during this
blessed night:  Let me see any one dare to enter the room, and be He
mortal or immortal, be He Ghost, Devil, or Man, I warrant his repenting
that ever He crossed the threshold!'

This hint was sufficiently strong, and Ambrosio understood its meaning.
But instead of showing that He perceived her suspicions; He replied
mildly that He approved the Duenna's precautions, and advised her to
persevere in her intention. This, She assured him faithfully that He
might depend upon her doing.  Jacintha then conducted him into the
chamber where the Ghost had appeared, and Flora returned to her Lady's.

Jacintha opened the door of the haunted room with a trembling hand:
She ventured to peep in; But the wealth of India would not have tempted
her to cross the threshold.  She gave the Taper to the Monk, wished him
well through the adventure, and hastened to be gone.  Ambrosio entered.
He bolted the door, placed the light upon the Table, and seated himself
in the Chair which on the former night had sustained Antonia.  In spite
of Matilda's assurances that the Spectre was a mere creation of fancy,
his mind was impressed with a certain mysterious horror.  He in vain
endeavoured to shake it off.  The silence of the night, the story of
the Apparition, the chamber wainscotted with dark oak pannells, the
recollection which it brought with it of the murdered Elvira, and his
incertitude respecting the nature of the drops given by him to Antonia,
made him feel uneasy at his present situation.  But He thought much
less of the Spectre, than of the poison.  Should He have destroyed the
only object which rendered life dear to him; Should the Ghost's
prediction prove true; Should Antonia in three days be no more, and He
the wretched cause of her death ...... The supposition was too
horrible to dwell upon.  He drove away these dreadful images, and as
often they presented themselves again before him.  Matilda had assured
him that the effects of the Opiate would be speedy.  He listened with
fear, yet with eagerness, expecting to hear some disturbance in the
adjoining chamber.  All was still silent.  He concluded that the drops
had not begun to operate.  Great was the stake, for which He now
played:  A moment would suffice to decide upon his misery or happiness.
Matilda had taught him the means of ascertaining that life was not
extinct for ever:  Upon this assay depended all his hopes.  With every
instant his impatience redoubled; His terrors grew more lively, his
anxiety more awake.  Unable to bear this state of incertitude, He
endeavoured to divert it by substituting the thoughts of Others to his
own.  The Books, as was before mentioned, were ranged upon shelves near
the Table: This stood exactly opposite to the Bed, which was placed in
an Alcove near the Closet door.  Ambrosio took down a Volume, and
seated himself by the Table:  But his attention wandered from the Pages
before him.  Antonia's image and that of the murdered Elvira persisted
to force themselves before his imagination.  Still He continued to
read, though his eyes ran over the characters without his mind being
conscious of their import. Such was his occupation, when He fancied
that He heard a footstep.  He turned his head, but nobody was to be
seen.

He resumed his Book; But in a few minutes after the same sound was
repeated, and followed by a rustling noise close behind him. He now
started from his seat, and looking round him, perceived the Closet door
standing half-unclosed.  On his first entering the room He had tried to
open it, but found it bolted on the inside.

'How is this?' said He to himself; 'How comes this door unfastened?'

He advanced towards it:  He pushed it open, and looked into the closet:
No one was there.  While He stood irresolute, He thought that He
distinguished a groaning in the adjacent chamber:  It was Antonia's,
and He supposed that the drops began to take effect:  But upon
listening more attentively, He found the noise to be caused by
Jacintha, who had fallen asleep by the Lady's Bedside, and was snoring
most lustily.  Ambrosio drew back, and returned to the other room,
musing upon the sudden opening of the Closet door, for which He strove
in vain to account.

He paced the chamber up and down in silence.  At length He stopped, and
the Bed attracted his attention. The curtain of the Recess was but
half-drawn.  He sighed involuntarily.

'That Bed,' said He in a low voice, 'That Bed was Elvira's! There has
She past many a quiet night, for She was good and innocent.  How sound
must have been her sleep!  And yet now She sleeps sounder!  Does She
indeed sleep?  Oh! God grant that She may!  What if She rose from her
Grave at this sad and silent hour?  What if She broke the bonds of the
Tomb, and glided angrily before my blasted eyes?  Oh! I never could
support the sight!  Again to see her form distorted by dying agonies,
her blood-swollen veins, her livid countenance, her eyes bursting from
their sockets with pain!  To hear her speak of future punishment,
menace me with Heaven's vengeance, tax me with the crimes I have
committed, with those I am going to commit ..... Great God! What is
that?'

As He uttered these words, his eyes which were fixed upon the Bed, saw
the curtain shaken gently backwards and forwards.  The Apparition was
recalled to his mind, and He almost fancied that He beheld Elvira's
visionary form reclining upon the Bed.  A few moments consideration
sufficed to reassure him.

'It was only the wind,' said He, recovering himself.

Again He paced the chamber; But an involuntary movement of awe and
inquietude constantly led his eye towards the Alcove.  He drew near it
with irresolution. He paused before He ascended the few steps which led
to it.  He put out his hand thrice to remove the curtain, and as often
drew it back.

'Absurd terrors!' He cried at length, ashamed of his own weakness----

Hastily he mounted the steps; When a Figure drest in white started from
the Alcove, and gliding by him, made with precipitation towards the
Closet.  Madness and despair now supplied the Monk with that courage,
of which He had till then been destitute.  He flew down the steps,
pursued the Apparition, and attempted to grasp it.

'Ghost, or Devil, I hold you!' He exclaimed, and seized the Spectre by
the arm.

'Oh!  Christ Jesus!' cried a shrill voice; 'Holy Father, how you gripe
me!  I protest that I meant no harm!'

This address, as well as the arm which He held, convinced the Abbot
that the supposed Ghost was substantial flesh and blood. He drew the
Intruder towards the Table, and holding up the light, discovered the
features of ...... Madona Flora!

Incensed at having been betrayed by this trifling cause into fears so
ridiculous, He asked her sternly, what business had brought her to that
chamber.  Flora, ashamed at being found out, and terrified at the
severity of Ambrosio's looks, fell upon her knees, and promised to make
a full confession.

'I protest, reverend Father,' said She, 'that I am quite grieved at
having disturbed you:  Nothing was further from my intention. I meant
to get out of the room as quietly as I got in; and had you been
ignorant that I watched you, you know, it would have been the same
thing as if I had not watched you at all.  To be sure, I did very wrong
in being a Spy upon you, that I cannot deny; But Lord! your Reverence,
how can a poor weak Woman resist curiosity?  Mine was so strong to know
what you were doing, that I could not but try to get a little peep,
without any body knowing any thing about it.  So with that I left old
Dame Jacintha sitting by my Lady's Bed, and I ventured to steal into
the Closet.  Being unwilling to interrupt you, I contented myself at
first with putting my eye to the Keyhole; But as I could see nothing by
this means, I undrew the bolt, and while your back was turned to the
Alcove, I whipt me in softly and silently.  Here I lay snug behind the
curtain, till your Reverence found me out, and seized me ere I had time
to regain the Closet door.  This is the whole truth, I assure you, Holy
Father, and I beg your pardon a thousand times for my impertinence.'

During this speech the Abbot had time to recollect himself:  He was
satisfied with reading the penitent Spy a lecture upon the dangers of
curiosity, and the meanness of the action in which She had been just
discovered.  Flora declared herself fully persuaded that She had done
wrong; She promised never to be guilty of the same fault again, and was
retiring very humble and contrite to Antonia's chamber, when the Closet
door was suddenly thrown open, and in rushed Jacintha pale and out of
breath.

'Oh!  Father!  Father!' She cried in a voice almost choaked with
terror; 'What shall I do!  What shall I do! Here is a fine piece of
work!  Nothing but misfortunes!  Nothing but dead people, and dying
people!  Oh!  I shall go distracted!  I shall go distracted!'

'Speak!  Speak!' cried Flora and the Monk at the same time; 'What has
happened?  What is the matter?'

'Oh! I shall have another Corse in my House!  Some Witch has certainly
cast a spell upon it, upon me, and upon all about me! Poor Donna
Antonia!  There She lies in just such convulsions, as killed her
Mother!  The Ghost told her true! I am sure, the Ghost has told her
true!'

Flora ran, or rather flew to her Lady's chamber: Ambrosio followed her,
his bosom trembling with hope and apprehension. They found Antonia as
Jacintha had described, torn by racking convulsions from which they in
vain endeavoured to relieve her. The Monk dispatched Jacintha to the
Abbey in all haste, and commissioned her to bring Father Pablos back
with her, without losing a moment.

'I will go for him,' replied Jacintha, 'and tell him to come hither;
But as to bringing him myself, I shall do no such thing. I am sure that
the House is bewitched, and burn me if ever I set foot in it again.'

With this resolution She set out for the Monastery, and delivered to
Father Pablos the Abbot's orders.  She then betook herself to the House
of old Simon Gonzalez, whom She resolved never to quit, till She had
made him her Husband, and his dwelling her own.

Father Pablos had no sooner beheld Antonia, than He pronounced her
incurable.  The convulsions continued for an hour:  During that time
her agonies were much milder than those which her groans created in the
Abbot's heart.  Her every pang seemed a dagger in his bosom, and He
cursed himself a thousand times for having adopted so barbarous a
project.  The hour being expired, by degrees the Fits became less
frequent, and Antonia less agitated.  She felt that her dissolution was
approaching, and that nothing could save her.

'Worthy Ambrosio,' She said in a feeble voice, while She pressed his
hand to her lips; 'I am now at liberty to express, how grateful is my
heart for your attention and kindness.  I am upon the bed of death; Yet
an hour, and I shall be no more.  I may therefore acknowledge without
restraint, that to relinquish your society was very painful to me:  But
such was the will of a Parent, and I dared not disobey.  I die without
repugnance: There are few, who will lament my leaving them; There are
few, whom I lament to leave.  Among those few, I lament for none more
than for yourself; But we shall meet again, Ambrosio!  We shall one day
meet in heaven:  There shall our friendship be renewed, and my Mother
shall view it with pleasure!'

She paused.  The Abbot shuddered when She mentioned Elvira: Antonia
imputed his emotion to pity and concern for her.

'You are grieved for me, Father,' She continued; 'Ah! sigh not for my
loss.  I have no crimes to repent, at least none of which I am
conscious, and I restore my soul without fear to him from whom I
received it.  I have but few requests to make:  Yet let me hope that
what few I have shall be granted.  Let a solemn Mass be said for my
soul's repose, and another for that of my beloved Mother.  Not that I
doubt her resting in her Grave:  I am now convinced that my reason
wandered, and the falsehood of the Ghost's prediction is sufficient to
prove my error.  But every one has some failing:  My Mother may have
had hers, though I knew them not:  I therefore wish a Mass to be
celebrated for her repose, and the expence may be defrayed by the
little wealth of which I am possessed.  Whatever may then remain, I
bequeath to my Aunt Leonella.  When I am dead, let the Marquis de las
Cisternas know that his Brother's unhappy family can no longer
importune him.  But disappointment makes me unjust:  They tell me that
He is ill, and perhaps had it been in his power, He wished to have
protected me.  Tell him then, Father, only that I am dead, and that if
He had any faults to me, I forgave him from my heart. This done, I have
nothing more to ask for, than your prayers: Promise to remember my
requests, and I shall resign my life without a pang or sorrow.'

Ambrosio engaged to comply with her desires, and proceeded to give her
absolution.  Every moment announced the approach of Antonia's fate:
Her sight failed; Her heart beat sluggishly; Her fingers stiffened, and
grew cold, and at two in the morning She expired without a groan.  As
soon as the breath had forsaken her body, Father Pablos retired,
sincerely affected at the melancholy scene.  On her part, Flora gave
way to the most unbridled sorrow.

Far different concerns employed Ambrosio:  He sought for the pulse
whose throbbing, so Matilda had assured him, would prove Antonia's
death but temporal.  He found it; He pressed it; It palpitated beneath
his hand, and his heart was filled with ecstacy. However, He carefully
concealed his satisfaction at the success of his plan.  He assumed a
melancholy air, and addressing himself to Flora, warned her against
abandoning herself to fruitless sorrow.  Her tears were too sincere to
permit her listening to his counsels, and She continued to weep
unceasingly.

The Friar withdrew, first promising to give orders himself about the
Funeral, which, out of consideration for Jacintha as He pretended,
should take place with all expedition.  Plunged in grief for the loss
of her beloved Mistress, Flora scarcely attended to what He said.
Ambrosio hastened to command the Burial.  He obtained permission from
the Prioress, that the Corse should be deposited in St. Clare's
Sepulchre: and on the Friday Morning, every proper and needful ceremony
being performed, Antonia's body was committed to the Tomb.

On the same day Leonella arrived at Madrid, intending to present her
young Husband to Elvira.  Various circumstances had obliged her to
defer her journey from Tuesday to Friday, and She had no opportunity of
making this alteration in her plans known to her Sister.  As her heart
was truly affectionate, and as She had ever entertained a sincere
regard for Elvira and her Daughter, her surprize at hearing of their
sudden and melancholy fate was fully equalled by her sorrow and
disappointment.  Ambrosio sent to inform her of Antonia's bequest:  At
her solication, He promised, as soon as Elvira's trifling debts were
discharged, to transmit to her the remainder.  This being settled, no
other business detained Leonella in Madrid, and She returned to Cordova
with all diligence.