----He was a fell despightful Fiend:
  Hell holds none worse in baleful bower below:
  By pride, and wit, and rage, and rancor keened;
  Of Man alike, if good or bad the Foe.
          Thomson.

On the day following Antonia's death, all Madrid was a scene of
consternation and amazement.  An Archer who had witnessed the adventure
in the Sepulchre had indiscreetly related the circumstances of the
murder:  He had also named the Perpetrator. The confusion was without
example which this intelligence raised among the Devotees.  Most of
them disbelieved it, and went themselves to the Abbey to ascertain the
fact.  Anxious to avoid the shame to which their Superior's ill-conduct
exposed the whole Brotherhood, the Monks assured the Visitors that
Ambrosio was prevented from receiving them as usual by nothing but
illness. This attempt was unsuccessful:  The same excuse being repeated
day after day, the Archer's story gradually obtained confidence. His
Partizans abandoned him:  No one entertained a doubt of his guilt; and
they who before had been the warmest in his praise were now the most
vociferous in his condemnation.

While his innocence or guilt was debated in Madrid with the utmost
acrimony, Ambrosio was a prey to the pangs of conscious villainy, and
the terrors of punishment impending over him.  When He looked back to
the eminence on which He had lately stood, universally honoured and
respected, at peace with the world and with himself, scarcely could He
believe that He was indeed the culprit whose crimes and whose fate He
trembled to envisage. But a few weeks had elapsed, since He was pure
and virtuous, courted by the wisest and noblest in Madrid, and regarded
by the People with a reverence that approached idolatry:  He now saw
himself stained with the most loathed and monstrous sins, the object of
universal execration, a Prisoner of the Holy Office, and probably
doomed to perish in tortures the most severe.  He could not hope to
deceive his Judges:  The proofs of his guilt were too strong.  His
being in the Sepulchre at so late an hour, his confusion at the
discovery, the dagger which in his first alarm He owned had been
concealed by him, and the blood which had spirted upon his habit from
Antonia's wound, sufficiently marked him out for the Assassin.  He
waited with agony for the day of examination:  He had no resource to
comfort him in his distress. Religion could not inspire him with
fortitude: If He read the Books of morality which were put into his
hands, He saw in them nothing but the enormity of his offences; If he
attempted to pray, He recollected that He deserved not heaven's
protection, and believed his crimes so monstrous as to baffle even
God's infinite goodness.  For every other Sinner He thought there might
be hope, but for him there could be none.  Shuddering at the past,
anguished by the present, and dreading the future, thus passed He the
few days preceding that which was marked for his Trial.

That day arrived.  At nine in the morning his prison door was unlocked,
and his Gaoler entering, commanded him to follow him. He obeyed with
trembling.  He was conducted into a spacious Hall, hung with black
cloth. At the Table sat three grave, stern-looking Men, also habited in
black:  One was the Grand Inquisitor, whom the importance of this cause
had induced to examine into it himself.  At a smaller table at a little
distance sat the Secretary, provided with all necessary implements for
writing.  Ambrosio was beckoned to advance, and take his station at the
lower end of the Table.  As his eye glanced downwards, He perceived
various iron instruments lying scattered upon the floor.  Their forms
were unknown to him, but apprehension immediately guessed them to be
engines of torture.  He turned pale, and with difficulty prevented
himself from sinking upon the ground.

Profound silence prevailed, except when the Inquisitors whispered a few
words among themselves mysteriously.  Near an hour past away, and with
every second of it Ambrosio's fears grew more poignant.  At length a
small Door, opposite to that by which He had entered the Hall, grated
heavily upon its hinges.  An Officer appeared, and was immediately
followed by the beautiful Matilda. Her hair hung about her face wildly;
Her cheeks were pale, and her eyes sunk and hollow. She threw a
melancholy look upon Ambrosio:  He replied by one of aversion and
reproach.  She was placed opposite to him.  A Bell then sounded thrice.
It was the signal for opening the Court, and the Inquisitors entered
upon their office.

In these trials neither the accusation is mentioned, or the name of the
Accuser.  The Prisoners are only asked, whether they will confess:  If
they reply that having no crime they can make no confession, they are
put to the torture without delay.  This is repeated at intervals,
either till the suspected avow themselves culpable, or the perseverance
of the examinants is worn out and exhausted: But without a direct
acknowledgment of their guilt, the Inquisition never pronounces the
final doom of its Prisoners.

In general much time is suffered to elapse without their being
questioned:  But Ambrosio's trial had been hastened, on account of a
solemn Auto da Fe which would take place in a few days, and in which
the Inquisitors meant this distinguished Culprit to perform a part, and
give a striking testimony of their vigilance.

The Abbot was not merely accused of rape and murder:  The crime of
Sorcery was laid to his charge, as well as to Matilda's.  She had been
seized as an Accomplice in Antonia's assassination.  On searching her
Cell, various suspicious books and instruments were found which
justified the accusation brought against her.  To criminate the Monk,
the constellated Mirror was produced, which Matilda had accidentally
left in his chamber. The strange figures engraved upon it caught the
attention of Don Ramirez, while searching the Abbot's Cell:  In
consequence, He carried it away with him.  It was shown to the Grand
Inquisitor, who having considered it for some time, took off a small
golden Cross which hung at his girdle, and laid it upon the Mirror.
Instantly a loud noise was heard, resembling a clap of thunder, and the
steel shivered into a thousand pieces. This circumstance confirmed the
suspicion of the Monk's having dealt in Magic:  It was even supposed
that his former influence over the minds of the People was entirely to
be ascribed to witchcraft.

Determined to make him confess not only the crimes which He had
committed, but those also of which He was innocent, the Inquisitors
began their examination. Though dreading the tortures, as He dreaded
death still more which would consign him to eternal torments, the Abbot
asserted his purity in a voice bold and resolute.  Matilda followed his
example, but spoke with fear and trembling.  Having in vain exhorted
him to confess, the Inquisitors ordered the Monk to be put to the
question.  The Decree was immediately executed.  Ambrosio suffered the
most excruciating pangs that ever were invented by human cruelty: Yet
so dreadful is Death when guilt accompanies it, that He had sufficient
fortitude to persist in his disavowal.  His agonies were redoubled in
consequence:  Nor was He released till fainting from excess of pain,
insensibility rescued him from the hands of his Tormentors.

Matilda was next ordered to the torture:  But terrified by the sight of
the Friar's sufferings, her courage totally deserted her.  She sank
upon her knees, acknowledged her corresponding with infernal Spirits,
and that She had witnessed the Monk's assassination of Antonia:  But as
to the crime of Sorcery, She declared herself the sole criminal, and
Ambrosio perfectly innocent.  The latter assertion met with no credit.
The Abbot had recovered his senses in time to hear the confession of
his Accomplice: But He was too much enfeebled by what He had already
undergone to be capable at that time of sustaining new torments.

He was commanded back to his Cell, but first informed that as soon as
He had gained strength sufficient, He must prepare himself for a second
examination.  The Inquisitors hoped that He would then be less hardened
and obstinate.  To Matilda it was announced that She must expiate her
crime in fire on the approaching Auto da Fe.  All her tears and
entreaties could procure no mitigation of her doom, and She was dragged
by force from the Hall of Trial.

Returned to his dungeon, the sufferings of Ambrosio's body were far
more supportable than those of his mind.  His dislocated limbs, the
nails torn from his hands and feet, and his fingers mashed and broken
by the pressure of screws, were far surpassed in anguish by the
agitation of his soul and vehemence of his terrors.  He saw that,
guilty or innocent, his Judges were bent upon condemning him:  The
remembrance of what his denial had already cost him terrified him at
the idea of being again applied to the question, and almost engaged him
to confess his crimes.  Then again the consequences of his confession
flashed before him, and rendered him once more irresolute.  His death
would be inevitable, and that a death the most dreadful:  He had
listened to Matilda's doom, and doubted not that a similar was reserved
for him.  He shuddered at the approaching Auto da Fe, at the idea of
perishing in flames, and only escaping from indurable torments to pass
into others more subtile and ever-lasting! With affright did He bend
his mind's eye on the space beyond the grave; nor could hide from
himself how justly he ought to dread Heaven's vengeance.  In this
Labyrinth of terrors, fain would He have taken his refuge in the gloom
of Atheism:  Fain would He have denied the soul's immortality; have
persuaded himself that when his eyes once closed, they would never more
open, and that the same moment would annihilate his soul and body.
Even this resource was refused to him.  To permit his being blind to
the fallacy of this belief, his knowledge was too extensive, his
understanding too solid and just.  He could not help feeling the
existence of a God.  Those truths, once his comfort, now presented
themselves before him in the clearest light; But they only served to
drive him to distraction.  They destroyed his ill-grounded hopes of
escaping punishment; and dispelled by the irresistible brightness of
Truth and convinction, Philosophy's deceitful vapours faded away like a
dream.

In anguish almost too great for mortal frame to bear, He expected the
time when He was again to be examined. He busied himself in planning
ineffectual schemes for escaping both present and future punishment.
Of the first there was no possibility; Of the second Despair made him
neglect the only means.  While Reason forced him to acknowledge a God's
existence, Conscience made him doubt the infinity of his goodness.  He
disbelieved that a Sinner like him could find mercy.  He had not been
deceived into error: Ignorance could furnish him with no excuse.  He
had seen vice in her true colours; Before He committed his crimes, He
had computed every scruple of their weight; and yet he had committed
them.

'Pardon?' He would cry in an access of phrenzy 'Oh! there can be none
for me!'

Persuaded of this, instead of humbling himself in penitence, of
deploring his guilt, and employing his few remaining hours in
deprecating Heaven's wrath, He abandoned himself to the transports of
desperate rage; He sorrowed for the punishment of his crimes, not their
commission; and exhaled his bosom's anguish in idle sighs, in vain
lamentations, in blasphemy and despair. As the few beams of day which
pierced through the bars of his prison window gradually disappeared,
and their place was supplied by the pale and glimmering Lamp, He felt
his terrors redouble, and his ideas become more gloomy, more solemn,
more despondent.  He dreaded the approach of sleep:  No sooner did his
eyes close, wearied with tears and watching, than the dreadful visions
seemed to be realised on which his mind had dwelt during the day. He
found himself in sulphurous realms and burning Caverns, surrounded by
Fiends appointed his Tormentors, and who drove him through a variety of
tortures, each of which was more dreadful than the former.  Amidst
these dismal scenes wandered the Ghosts of Elvira and her Daughter.
They reproached him with their deaths, recounted his crimes to the
Daemons, and urged them to inflict torments of cruelty yet more
refined.  Such were the pictures which floated before his eyes in
sleep:  They vanished not till his repose was disturbed by excess of
agony.  Then would He start from the ground on which He had stretched
himself, his brows running down with cold sweat, his eyes wild and
phrenzied; and He only exchanged the terrible certainty for surmizes
scarcely more supportable.  He paced his dungeon with disordered steps;
He gazed with terror upon the surrounding darkness, and often did He
cry,

  'Oh! fearful is night to the Guilty!'

The day of his second examination was at hand.  He had been compelled
to swallow cordials, whose virtues were calculated to restore his
bodily strength, and enable him to support the question longer.  On the
night preceding this dreaded day, his fears for the morrow permitted
him not to sleep.  His terrors were so violent, as nearly to annihilate
his mental powers.  He sat like one stupefied near the Table on which
his Lamp was burning dimly. Despair chained up his faculties in
Idiotism, and He remained for some hours, unable to speak or move, or
indeed to think.

'Look up, Ambrosio!' said a Voice in accents well-known to him--

The Monk started, and raised his melancholy eyes. Matilda stood before
him.  She had quitted her religious habit.  She now wore a female
dress, at once elegant and splendid:  A profusion of diamonds blazed
upon her robes, and her hair was confined by a coronet of Roses.  In
her right hand She held a small Book:  A lively expression of pleasure
beamed upon her countenance; But still it was mingled with a wild
imperious majesty which inspired the Monk with awe, and represt in some
measure his transports at seeing her.

'You here, Matilda?' He at length exclaimed; 'How have you gained
entrance?  Where are your Chains?  What means this magnificence, and
the joy which sparkles in your eyes?  Have our Judges relented?  Is
there a chance of my escaping?  Answer me for pity, and tell me, what I
have to hope, or fear.'

'Ambrosio!' She replied with an air of commanding dignity; 'I have
baffled the Inquisition's fury.  I am free: A few moments will place
kingdoms between these dungeons and me.  Yet I purchase my liberty at a
dear, at a dreadful price!  Dare you pay the same, Ambrosio?  Dare you
spring without fear over the bounds which separate Men from
Angels?--You are silent.--You look upon me with eyes of suspicion and
alarm--I read your thoughts and confess their justice.  Yes, Ambrosio;
I have sacrificed all for life and liberty.  I am no longer a candidate
for heaven!  I have renounced God's service, and am enlisted beneath
the banners of his Foes.  The deed is past recall: Yet were it in my
power to go back, I would not.  Oh! my Friend, to expire in such
torments!  To die amidst curses and execrations! To bear the insults of
an exasperated Mob!  To be exposed to all the mortifications of shame
and infamy!  Who can reflect without horror on such a doom?  Let me
then exult in my exchange.  I have sold distant and uncertain happiness
for present and secure: I have preserved a life which otherwise I had
lost in torture; and I have obtained the power of procuring every bliss
which can make that life delicious!  The Infernal Spirits obey me as
their Sovereign:  By their aid shall my days be past in every
refinement of luxury and voluptuousness.  I will enjoy unrestrained the
gratification of my senses:  Every passion shall be indulged, even to
satiety; Then will I bid my Servants invent new pleasures, to revive
and stimulate my glutted appetites!  I go impatient to exercise my
newly-gained dominion. I pant to be at liberty.  Nothing should hold me
one moment longer in this abhorred abode, but the hope of persuading
you to follow my example.  Ambrosio, I still love you:  Our mutual
guilt and danger have rendered you dearer to me than ever, and I would
fain save you from impending destruction.  Summon then your resolution
to your aid; and renounce for immediate and certain benefits the hopes
of a salvation, difficult to obtain, and perhaps altogether erroneous.
Shake off the prejudice of vulgar souls; Abandon a God who has
abandoned you, and raise yourself to the level of superior Beings!'

She paused for the Monk's reply:  He shuddered, while He gave it.

'Matilda!' He said after a long silence in a low and unsteady voice;
'What price gave you for liberty?'

She answered him firm and dauntless.

'Ambrosio, it was my Soul!'

'Wretched Woman, what have you done?  Pass but a few years, and how
dreadful will be your sufferings!'

'Weak Man, pass but this night, and how dreadful will be your own!  Do
you remember what you have already endured?  Tomorrow you must bear
torments doubly exquisite.  Do you remember the horrors of a fiery
punishment?  In two days you must be led a Victim to the Stake!  What
then will become of you?  Still dare you hope for pardon?  Still are
you beguiled with visions of salvation?  Think upon your crimes!  Think
upon your lust, your perjury, inhumanity, and hypocrisy!  Think upon
the innocent blood which cries to the Throne of God for vengeance, and
then hope for mercy!  Then dream of heaven, and sigh for worlds of
light, and realms of peace and pleasure!  Absurd!  Open your eyes,
Ambrosio, and be prudent.  Hell is your lot; You are doomed to eternal
perdition; Nought lies beyond your grave but a gulph of devouring
flames.  And will you then speed towards that Hell? Will you clasp that
perdition in your arms, ere 'tis needful? Will you plunge into those
flames while you still have the power to shun them?  'Tis a Madman's
action.  No, no, Ambrosio:  Let us for awhile fly from divine
vengeance.  Be advised by me; Purchase by one moment's courage the
bliss of years; Enjoy the present, and forget that a future lags
behind.'

'Matilda, your counsels are dangerous:  I dare not, I will not follow
them.  I must not give up my claim to salvation. Monstrous are my
crimes; But God is merciful, and I will not despair of pardon.'

'Is such your resolution?  I have no more to say.  I speed to joy and
liberty, and abandon you to death and eternal torments.'

'Yet stay one moment, Matilda!  You command the infernal Daemons:

You can force open these prison doors; You can release me from these
chains which weigh me down.  Save me, I conjure you, and bear me from
these fearful abodes!'

'You ask the only boon beyond my power to bestow.  I am forbidden to
assist a Churchman and a Partizan of God:  Renounce those titles, and
command me.'

'I will not sell my soul to perdition.'

'Persist in your obstinacy, till you find yourself at the Stake: Then
will you repent your error, and sigh for escape when the moment is gone
by.  I quit you.  Yet ere the hour of death arrives should wisdom
enlighten you, listen to the means of repairing your present fault.  I
leave with you this Book.  Read the four first lines of the seventh
page backwards:  The Spirit whom you have already once beheld will
immediately appear to you.  If you are wise, we shall meet again:  If
not, farewell for ever!'

She let the Book fall upon the ground.  A cloud of blue fire wrapped
itself round her:  She waved her hand to Ambrosio, and disappeared.
The momentary glare which the flames poured through the dungeon, on
dissipating suddenly, seemed to have increased its natural gloom.  The
solitary Lamp scarcely gave light sufficient to guide the Monk to a
Chair.  He threw himself into his seat, folded his arms, and leaning
his head upon the table, sank into reflections perplexing and
unconnected.

He was still in this attitude when the opening of the prison door
rouzed him from his stupor.  He was summoned to appear before the Grand
Inquisitor.  He rose, and followed his Gaoler with painful steps.  He
was led into the same Hall, placed before the same Examiners, and was
again interrogated whether He would confess. He replied as before, that
having no crimes, He could acknowledge none:  But when the Executioners
prepared to put him to the question, when He saw the engines of
torture, and remembered the pangs which they had already inflicted, his
resolution failed him entirely.  Forgetting the consequences, and only
anxious to escape the terrors of the present moment, He made an ample
confession.  He disclosed every circumstance of his guilt, and owned
not merely the crimes with which He was charged, but those of which He
had never been suspected.  Being interrogated as to Matilda's flight
which had created much confusion, He confessed that She had sold
herself to Satan, and that She was indebted to Sorcery for her escape.
He still assured his Judges that for his own part He had never entered
into any compact with the infernal Spirits; But the threat of being
tortured made him declare himself to be a Sorcerer, and Heretic, and
whatever other title the Inquisitors chose to fix upon him.  In
consequence of this avowal, his sentence was immediately pronounced.
He was ordered to prepare himself to perish in the Auto da Fe, which
was to be solemnized at twelve o'clock that night.  This hour was
chosen from the idea that the horror of the flames being heightened by
the gloom of midnight, the execution would have a greater effect upon
the mind of the People.

Ambrosio rather dead than alive was left alone in his dungeon. The
moment in which this terrible decree was pronounced had nearly proved
that of his dissolution. He looked forward to the morrow with despair,
and his terrors increased with the approach of midnight.  Sometimes He
was buried in gloomy silence:  At others He raved with delirious
passion, wrung his hands, and cursed the hour when He first beheld the
light.  In one of these moments his eye rested upon Matilda's
mysterious gift.  His transports of rage were instantly suspended.  He
looked earnestly at the Book; He took it up, but immediately threw it
from him with horror.  He walked rapidly up and down his dungeon:  Then
stopped, and again fixed his eyes on the spot where the Book had
fallen.  He reflected that here at least was a resource from the fate
which He dreaded.  He stooped, and took it up a second time.

He remained for some time trembling and irresolute:  He longed to try
the charm, yet feared its consequences.  The recollection of his
sentence at length fixed his indecision.  He opened the Volume; but his
agitation was so great that He at first sought in vain for the page
mentioned by Matilda.  Ashamed of himself, He called all his courage to
his aid.  He turned to the seventh leaf.  He began to read it aloud;
But his eyes frequently wandered from the Book, while He anxiously cast
them round in search of the Spirit, whom He wished, yet dreaded to
behold. Still He persisted in his design; and with a voice unassured
and frequent interruptions, He contrived to finish the four first lines
of the page.

They were in a language, whose import was totally unknown to him.

Scarce had He pronounced the last word when the effects of the charm
were evident.  A loud burst of Thunder was heard; The prison shook to
its very foundations; A blaze of lightning flashed through the Cell;
and in the next moment, borne upon sulphurous whirl-winds, Lucifer
stood before him a second time. But He came not as when at Matilda's
summons He borrowed the Seraph's form to deceive Ambrosio.  He appeared
in all that ugliness which since his fall from heaven had been his
portion: His blasted limbs still bore marks of the Almighty's thunder:
A swarthy darkness spread itself over his gigantic form:  His hands and
feet were armed with long Talons:  Fury glared in his eyes, which might
have struck the bravest heart with terror: Over his huge shoulders
waved two enormous sable wings; and his hair was supplied by living
snakes, which twined themselves round his brows with frightful
hissings.  In one hand He held a roll of parchment, and in the other an
iron pen.  Still the lightning flashed around him, and the Thunder with
repeated bursts, seemed to announce the dissolution of Nature.

Terrified at an Apparition so different from what He had expected,
Ambrosio remained gazing upon the Fiend, deprived of the power of
utterance.  The Thunder had ceased to roll: Universal silence reigned
through the dungeon.

'For what am I summoned hither?' said the Daemon, in a voice which
sulphurous fogs had damped to hoarseness--

At the sound Nature seemed to tremble:  A violent earthquake rocked the
ground, accompanied by a fresh burst of Thunder, louder and more
appalling than the first.

Ambrosio was long unable to answer the Daemon's demand.

'I am condemned to die;' He said with a faint voice, his blood running
cold, while He gazed upon his dreadful Visitor.  'Save me!  Bear me
from hence!'

'Shall the reward of my services be paid me?  Dare you embrace my
cause?  Will you be mine, body and soul?  Are you prepared to renounce
him who made you, and him who died for you?  Answer but "Yes" and
Lucifer is your Slave.'

'Will no less price content you?  Can nothing satisfy you but my
eternal ruin?  Spirit, you ask too much.  Yet convey me from this
dungeon:  Be my Servant for one hour, and I will be yours for a
thousand years.  Will not this offer suffice?'

'It will not.  I must have your soul; must have it mine, and mine for
ever.'

'Insatiate Daemon, I will not doom myself to endless torments.  I will
not give up my hopes of being one day pardoned.'

'You will not?  On what Chimaera rest then your hopes? Short-sighted
Mortal!  Miserable Wretch!  Are you not guilty? Are you not infamous in
the eyes of Men and Angels.  Can such enormous sins be forgiven?  Hope
you to escape my power?  Your fate is already pronounced. The Eternal
has abandoned you; Mine you are marked in the book of destiny, and mine
you must and shall be!'

'Fiend, 'tis false!  Infinite is the Almighty's mercy, and the Penitent
shall meet his forgiveness.  My crimes are monstrous, but I will not
despair of pardon:  Haply, when they have received due chastisement....'

'Chastisement?  Was Purgatory meant for guilt like yours?  Hope you
that your offences shall be bought off by prayers of superstitious
dotards and droning Monks?  Ambrosio, be wise! Mine you must be:  You
are doomed to flames, but may shun them for the present.  Sign this
parchment:  I will bear you from hence, and you may pass your remaining
years in bliss and liberty.  Enjoy your existence:  Indulge in every
pleasure to which appetite may lead you:  But from the moment that it
quits your body, remember that your soul belongs to me, and that I will
not be defrauded of my right.'

The Monk was silent; But his looks declared that the Tempter's words
were not thrown away.  He reflected on the conditions proposed with
horror:  On the other hand, He believed himself doomed to perdition and
that, by refusing the Daemon's succour, He only hastened tortures which
He never could escape.  The Fiend saw that his resolution was shaken:
He renewed his instances, and endeavoured to fix the Abbot's
indecision.  He described the agonies of death in the most terrific
colours; and He worked so powerfully upon Ambrosio's despair and fears
that He prevailed upon him to receive the Parchment.  He then struck
the iron Pen which He held into a vein of the Monk's left hand.  It
pierced deep, and was instantly filled with blood; Yet Ambrosio felt no
pain from the wound.  The Pen was put into his hand:  It trembled.  The
Wretch placed the Parchment on the Table before him, and prepared to
sign it.  Suddenly He held his hand:  He started away hastily, and
threw the Pen upon the table.

'What am I doing?' He cried--Then turning to the Fiend with a desperate
air, 'Leave me!  Begone!  I will not sign the Parchment.'

'Fool!' exclaimed the disappointed Daemon, darting looks so furious as
penetrated the Friar's soul with horror; 'Thus am I trifled with?  Go
then!  Rave in agony, expire in tortures, and then learn the extent of
the Eternal's mercy!  But beware how you make me again your mock!  Call
me no more till resolved to accept my offers!  Summon me a second time
to dismiss me thus idly, and these Talons shall rend you into a
thousand pieces! Speak yet again; Will you sign the Parchment?'

'I will not!  Leave me!  Away!'

Instantly the Thunder was heard to roll horribly: Once more the earth
trembled with violence:  The Dungeon resounded with loud shrieks, and
the Daemon fled with blasphemy and curses.

At first, the Monk rejoiced at having resisted the Seducer's arts, and
obtained a triumph over Mankind's Enemy:  But as the hour of punishment
drew near, his former terrors revived in his heart.  Their momentary
repose seemed to have given them fresh vigour.  The nearer that the
time approached, the more did He dread appearing before the Throne of
God.  He shuddered to think how soon He must be plunged into eternity;
How soon meet the eyes of his Creator, whom He had so grievously
offended.  The Bell announced midnight:  It was the signal for being
led to the Stake!  As He listened to the first stroke, the blood ceased
to circulate in the Abbot's veins:  He heard death and torture murmured
in each succeeding sound.  He expected to see the Archers entering his
prison; and as the Bell forbore to toll, he seized the magic volume in
a fit of despair.  He opened it, turned hastily to the seventh page,
and as if fearing to allow himself a moment's thought ran over the
fatal lines with rapidity.  Accompanied by his former terrors, Lucifer
again stood before the Trembler.

'You have summoned me,' said the Fiend; 'Are you determined to be wise?
Will you accept my conditions?  You know them already. Renounce your
claim to salvation, make over to me your soul, and I bear you from this
dungeon instantly.  Yet is it time. Resolve, or it will be too late.
Will you sign the Parchment?'

'I must!--Fate urges me! I accept your conditions.'

'Sign the Parchment!' replied the Daemon in an exulting tone.

The Contract and the bloody Pen still lay upon the Table. Ambrosio drew
near it.  He prepared to sign his name.  A moment's reflection made him
hesitate.

'Hark!' cried the Tempter; 'They come!  Be quick! Sign the Parchment,
and I bear you from hence this moment.'

In effect, the Archers were heard approaching, appointed to lead
Ambrosio to the Stake.  The sound encouraged the Monk in his resolution.

'What is the import of this writing?' said He.

'It makes your soul over to me for ever, and without reserve.'

'What am I to receive in exchange?'

'My protection, and release from this dungeon.  Sign it, and this
instant I bear you away.'

Ambrosio took up the Pen; He set it to the Parchment. Again his courage
failed him:  He felt a pang of terror at his heart, and once more threw
the Pen upon the Table.

'Weak and Puerile!' cried the exasperated Fiend: 'Away with this folly!
Sign the writing this instant, or I sacrifice you to my rage!'

At this moment the bolt of the outward Door was drawn back.  The
Prisoner heard the rattling of Chains; The heavy Bar fell; The Archers
were on the point of entering.  Worked up to phrenzy by the urgent
danger, shrinking from the approach of death, terrified by the Daemon's
threats, and seeing no other means to escape destruction, the wretched
Monk complied.  He signed the fatal contract, and gave it hastily into
the evil Spirit's hands, whose eyes, as He received the gift, glared
with malicious rapture.

'Take it!' said the God-abandoned; 'Now then save me!  Snatch me from
hence!'

'Hold!  Do you freely and absolutely renounce your Creator and his Son?'

'I do! I do!'

'Do you make over your soul to me for ever?'

'For ever!'

'Without reserve or subterfuge?  Without future appeal to the divine
mercy?'

The last Chain fell from the door of the prison:  The key was heard
turning in the Lock:  Already the iron door grated heavily upon its
rusty hinges.

'I am yours for ever and irrevocably!' cried the Monk wild with terror:
'I abandon all claim to salvation!  I own no power but yours!  Hark!
Hark!  They come!  Oh! save me!  Bear me away!'

'I have triumphed!  You are mine past reprieve, and I fulfil my
promise.'

While He spoke, the Door unclosed.  Instantly the Daemon grasped one of
Ambrosio's arms, spread his broad pinions, and sprang with him into the
air.  The roof opened as they soared upwards, and closed again when
they had quitted the Dungeon.

In the meanwhile, the Gaoler was thrown into the utmost surprize by the
disappearance of his Prisoner.  Though neither He nor the Archers were
in time to witness the Monk's escape, a sulphurous smell prevailing
through the prison sufficiently informed them by whose aid He had been
liberated.  They hastened to make their report to the Grand Inquisitor.
The story, how a Sorcerer had been carried away by the Devil, was soon
noised about Madrid; and for some days the whole City was employed in
discussing the subject.  Gradually it ceased to be the topic of
conversation: Other adventures arose whose novelty engaged universal
attention; and Ambrosio was soon forgotten as totally, as if He never
had existed.  While this was passing, the Monk supported by his
infernal guide, traversed the air with the rapidity of an arrow, and a
few moments placed him upon a Precipice's brink, the steepest in Sierra
Morena.

Though rescued from the Inquisition, Ambrosio as yet was insensible of
the blessings of liberty.  The damning contract weighed heavy upon his
mind; and the scenes in which He had been a principal actor had left
behind them such impressions as rendered his heart the seat of anarchy
and confusion.  The Objects now before his eyes, and which the full
Moon sailing through clouds permitted him to examine, were
ill-calculated to inspire that calm, of which He stood so much in need.
The disorder of his imagination was increased by the wildness of the
surrounding scenery; By the gloomy Caverns and steep rocks, rising
above each other, and dividing the passing clouds; solitary clusters of
Trees scattered here and there, among whose thick-twined branches the
wind of night sighed hoarsely and mournfully; the shrill cry of
mountain Eagles, who had built their nests among these lonely Desarts;
the stunning roar of torrents, as swelled by late rains they rushed
violently down tremendous precipices; and the dark waters of a silent
sluggish stream which faintly reflected the moonbeams, and bathed the
Rock's base on which Ambrosio stood.  The Abbot cast round him a look
of terror.  His infernal Conductor was still by his side, and eyed him
with a look of mingled malice, exultation, and contempt.

'Whither have you brought me?' said the Monk at length in an hollow
trembling voice:  'Why am I placed in this melancholy scene?  Bear me
from it quickly!  Carry me to Matilda!'

The Fiend replied not, but continued to gaze upon him in silence.

Ambrosio could not sustain his glance; He turned away his eyes, while
thus spoke the Daemon:

'I have him then in my power!  This model of piety!  This being without
reproach!  This Mortal who placed his puny virtues on a level with
those of Angels.  He is mine!  Irrevocably, eternally mine!  Companions
of my sufferings!  Denizens of hell!  How grateful will be my present!'

He paused; then addressed himself to the Monk----

'Carry you to Matilda?' He continued, repeating Ambrosio's words:

'Wretch! you shall soon be with her! You well deserve a place near her,
for hell boasts no miscreant more guilty than yourself.

Hark, Ambrosio, while I unveil your crimes!  You have shed the blood of
two innocents; Antonia and Elvira perished by your hand. That Antonia
whom you violated, was your Sister! That Elvira whom you murdered, gave
you birth! Tremble, abandoned Hypocrite! Inhuman Parricide! Incestuous
Ravisher!  Tremble at the extent of your offences!  And you it was who
thought yourself proof against temptation, absolved from human
frailties, and free from error and vice!  Is pride then a virtue?  Is
inhumanity no fault? Know, vain Man!  That I long have marked you for
my prey:  I watched the movements of your heart; I saw that you were
virtuous from vanity, not principle, and I seized the fit moment of
seduction.  I observed your blind idolatry of the Madona's picture.  I
bad a subordinate but crafty spirit assume a similar form, and you
eagerly yielded to the blandishments of Matilda. Your pride was
gratified by her flattery; Your lust only needed an opportunity to
break forth; You ran into the snare blindly, and scrupled not to commit
a crime which you blamed in another with unfeeling severity.  It was I
who threw Matilda in your way; It was I who gave you entrance to
Antonia's chamber; It was I who caused the dagger to be given you which
pierced your Sister's bosom; and it was I who warned Elvira in dreams
of your designs upon her Daughter, and thus, by preventing your
profiting by her sleep, compelled you to add rape as well as incest to
the catalogue of your crimes.  Hear, hear, Ambrosio!  Had you resisted
me one minute longer, you had saved your body and soul. The guards whom
you heard at your prison door came to signify your pardon.  But I had
already triumphed:  My plots had already succeeded.  Scarcely could I
propose crimes so quick as you performed them.  You are mine, and
Heaven itself cannot rescue you from my power.  Hope not that your
penitence will make void our contract. Here is your bond signed with
your blood; You have given up your claim to mercy, and nothing can
restore to you the rights which you have foolishly resigned.  Believe
you that your secret thoughts escaped me?  No, no, I read them all!
You trusted that you should still have time for repentance.  I saw your
artifice, knew its falsity, and rejoiced in deceiving the deceiver!
You are mine beyond reprieve:  I burn to possess my right, and alive
you quit not these mountains.'

During the Daemon's speech, Ambrosio had been stupefied by terror and
surprize.  This last declaration rouzed him.

'Not quit these mountains alive?' He exclaimed: 'Perfidious, what mean
you?  Have you forgotten our contract?'

The Fiend answered by a malicious laugh:

'Our contract?  Have I not performed my part?  What more did I promise
than to save you from your prison?  Have I not done so? Are you not
safe from the Inquisition--safe from all but from me?  Fool that you
were to confide yourself to a Devil!  Why did you not stipulate for
life, and power, and pleasure?  Then all would have been granted:  Now,
your reflections come too late. Miscreant, prepare for death; You have
not many hours to live!'

On hearing this sentence, dreadful were the feelings of the devoted
Wretch!  He sank upon his knees, and raised his hands towards heaven.
The Fiend read his intention and prevented it--

'What?' He cried, darting at him a look of fury:  'Dare you still
implore the Eternal's mercy?  Would you feign penitence, and again act
an Hypocrite's part?  Villain, resign your hopes of pardon.  Thus I
secure my prey!'

As He said this, darting his talons into the Monk's shaven crown, He
sprang with him from the rock.  The Caves and mountains rang with
Ambrosio's shrieks. The Daemon continued to soar aloft, till reaching a
dreadful height, He released the sufferer.  Headlong fell the Monk
through the airy waste; The sharp point of a rock received him; and He
rolled from precipice to precipice, till bruised and mangled He rested
on the river's banks.  Life still existed in his miserable frame: He
attempted in vain to raise himself; His broken and dislocated limbs
refused to perform their office, nor was He able to quit the spot where
He had first fallen.  The Sun now rose above the horizon; Its scorching
beams darted full upon the head of the expiring Sinner.  Myriads of
insects were called forth by the warmth; They drank the blood which
trickled from Ambrosio's wounds; He had no power to drive them from
him, and they fastened upon his sores, darted their stings into his
body, covered him with their multitudes, and inflicted on him tortures
the most exquisite and insupportable. The Eagles of the rock tore his
flesh piecemeal, and dug out his eyeballs with their crooked beaks.  A
burning thirst tormented him; He heard the river's murmur as it rolled
beside him, but strove in vain to drag himself towards the sound.
Blind, maimed, helpless, and despairing, venting his rage in blasphemy
and curses, execrating his existence, yet dreading the arrival of death
destined to yield him up to greater torments, six miserable days did
the Villain languish.  On the Seventh a violent storm arose: The winds
in fury rent up rocks and forests:  The sky was now black with clouds,
now sheeted with fire:  The rain fell in torrents; It swelled the
stream; The waves overflowed their banks; They reached the spot where
Ambrosio lay, and when they abated carried with them into the river the
Corse of the despairing Monk.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Monk; a romance, by M. G. Lewis