V

  Great Heaven!  How frail thy creature Man is made!
  How by himself insensibly betrayed!
  In our own strength unhappily secure,
  Too little cautious of the adverse power,
  On pleasure's flowery brink we idly stray,
  Masters as yet of our returning way:
  Till the strong gusts of raging passion rise,
  Till the dire Tempest mingles earth and skies,
  And swift into the boundless Ocean borne,
  Our foolish confidence too late we mourn:
  Round our devoted heads the billows beat,
  And from our troubled view the lessening lands retreat.
                       Prior.


All this while, Ambrosio was unconscious of the dreadful scenes which
were passing so near.  The execution of his designs upon Antonia
employed his every thought.  Hitherto, He was satisfied with the
success of his plans.  Antonia had drank the opiate, was buried in the
vaults of St. Clare, and absolutely in his disposal.  Matilda, who was
well acquainted with the nature and effects of the soporific medicine,
had computed that it would not cease to operate till one in the
Morning.  For that hour He waited with impatience.  The Festival of St.
Clare presented him with a favourable opportunity of consummating his
crime.  He was certain that the Friars and Nuns would be engaged in the
Procession, and that He had no cause to dread an interruption: From
appearing himself at the head of his Monks, He had desired to be
excused.  He doubted not, that being beyond the reach of help, cut off
from all the world, and totally in his power, Antonia would comply with
his desires.  The affection which She had ever exprest for him,
warranted this persuasion:  But He resolved that should She prove
obstinate, no consideration whatever should prevent him from enjoying
her.  Secure from a discovery, He shuddered not at the idea of
employing force:  If He felt any repugnance, it arose not from a
principle of shame or compassion, but from his feeling for Antonia the
most sincere and ardent affection, and wishing to owe her favours to no
one but herself.

The Monks quitted the Abbey at midnight.  Matilda was among the
Choristers, and led the chaunt.  Ambrosio was left by himself, and at
liberty to pursue his own inclinations.  Convinced that no one remained
behind to watch his motions, or disturb his pleasures, He now hastened
to the Western Aisles.  His heart beating with hope not unmingled with
anxiety, He crossed the Garden, unlocked the door which admitted him
into the Cemetery, and in a few minutes He stood before the Vaults.
Here He paused.

He looked round him with suspicion, conscious that his business was
unfit for any other eye.  As He stood in hesitation, He heard the
melancholy shriek of the screech-Owl:  The wind rattled loudly against
the windows of the adjacent Convent, and as the current swept by him,
bore with it the faint notes of the chaunt of Choristers.  He opened
the door cautiously, as if fearing to be overheard:  He entered; and
closed it again after him. Guided by his Lamp, He threaded the long
passages, in whose windings Matilda had instructed him, and reached the
private Vault which contained his sleeping Mistress.

Its entrance was by no means easy to discover:  But this was no
obstacle to Ambrosio, who at the time of Antonia's Funeral had observed
it too carefully to be deceived.  He found the door, which was
unfastened, pushed it open, and descended into the dungeon.  He
approached the humble Tomb in which Antonia reposed.  He had provided
himself with an iron crow and a pick-axe; But this precaution was
unnecessary.  The Grate was slightly fastened on the outside:  He
raised it, and placing the Lamp upon its ridge, bent silently over the
Tomb.  By the side of three putrid half-corrupted Bodies lay the
sleeping Beauty.  A lively red, the forerunner of returning animation,
had already spread itself over her cheek; and as wrapped in her shroud
She reclined upon her funeral Bier, She seemed to smile at the Images
of Death around her.  While He gazed upon their rotting bones and
disgusting figures, who perhaps were once as sweet and lovely, Ambrosio
thought upon Elvira, by him reduced to the same state. As the memory of
that horrid act glanced upon his mind, it was clouded with a gloomy
horror.  Yet it served but to strengthen his resolution to destroy
Antonia's honour.

'For your sake, Fatal Beauty!' murmured the Monk, while gazing on his
devoted prey; 'For your sake, have I committed this murder, and sold
myself to eternal tortures.  Now you are in my power: The produce of my
guilt will at least be mine.  Hope not that your prayers breathed in
tones of unequalled melody, your bright eyes filled with tears, and
your hands lifted in supplication, as when seeking in penitence the
Virgin's pardon; Hope not that your moving innocence, your beauteous
grief, or all your suppliant arts shall ransom you from my embraces.
Before the break of day, mine you must, and mine you shall be!'

He lifted her still motionless from the Tomb:  He seated himself upon a
bank of Stone, and supporting her in his arms, watched impatiently for
the symptoms of returning animation.  Scarcely could He command his
passions sufficiently, to restrain himself from enjoying her while yet
insensible.  His natural lust was increased in ardour by the
difficulties which had opposed his satisfying it:  As also by his long
abstinence from Woman, since from the moment of resigning her claim to
his love, Matilda had exiled him from her arms for ever.

'I am no Prostitute, Ambrosio;' Had She told him, when in the fullness
of his lust He demanded her favours with more than usual earnestness;
'I am now no more than your Friend, and will not be your Mistress.
Cease then to solicit my complying with desires, which insult me.
While your heart was mine, I gloried in your embraces:  Those happy
times are past:  My person is become indifferent to you, and 'tis
necessity, not love, which makes you seek my enjoyment.  I cannot yield
to a request so humiliating to my pride.'

Suddenly deprived of pleasures, the use of which had made them an
absolute want, the Monk felt this restraint severely.  Naturally
addicted to the gratification of the senses, in the full vigour of
manhood, and heat of blood, He had suffered his temperament to acquire
such ascendency that his lust was become madness.  Of his fondness for
Antonia, none but the grosser particles remained: He longed for the
possession of her person; and even the gloom of the vault, the
surrounding silence, and the resistance which He expected from her,
seemed to give a fresh edge to his fierce and unbridled desires.

Gradually He felt the bosom which rested against his, glow with
returning warmth.  Her heart throbbed again; Her blood flowed swifter,
and her lips moved.  At length She opened her eyes, but still opprest
and bewildered by the effects of the strong opiate, She closed them
again immediately.  Ambrosio watched her narrowly, nor permitted a
movement to escape him.  Perceiving that She was fully restored to
existence, He caught her in rapture to his bosom, and closely pressed
his lips to hers.  The suddenness of his action sufficed to dissipate
the fumes which obscured Antonia's reason.  She hastily raised herself,
and cast a wild look round her.  The strange Images which presented
themselves on every side contributed to confuse her.  She put her hand
to her head, as if to settle her disordered imagination.  At length She
took it away, and threw her eyes through the dungeon a second time.
They fixed upon the Abbot's face.

'Where am I?' She said abruptly.  'How came I here?  Where is my
Mother?  Methought, I saw her!  Oh! a dream, a dreadful dreadful dream
told me ...... But where am I?  Let me go!  I cannot stay here!'

She attempted to rise, but the Monk prevented her.

'Be calm, lovely Antonia!' He replied; 'No danger is near you: Confide
in my protection.  Why do you gaze on me so earnestly? Do you not know
me?  Not know your Friend?  Ambrosio?'

'Ambrosio?  My Friend?  Oh!  yes, yes; I remember ...... But why
am I here?  Who has brought me?  Why are you with me? Oh! Flora bad me
beware .....! Here are nothing but Graves, and Tombs, and
Skeletons! This place frightens me!  Good Ambrosio take me away from
it, for it recalls my fearful dream!  Methought I was dead, and laid in
my grave!  Good Ambrosio, take me from hence.  Will you not?  Oh! will
you not?  Do not look on me thus!

Your flaming eyes terrify me!  Spare me, Father! Oh! spare me for God's
sake!'

'Why these terrors, Antonia?' rejoined the Abbot, folding her in his
arms, and covering her bosom with kisses which She in vain struggled to
avoid:  'What fear you from me, from one who adores you?  What matters
it where you are?  This Sepulchre seems to me Love's bower; This gloom
is the friendly night of mystery which He spreads over our delights!
Such do I think it, and such must my Antonia.  Yes, my sweet Girl!
Yes! Your veins shall glow with fire which circles in mine, and my
transports shall be doubled by your sharing them!'

While He spoke thus, He repeated his embraces, and permitted himself
the most indecent liberties.  Even Antonia's ignorance was not proof
against the freedom of his behaviour.  She was sensible of her danger,
forced herself from his arms, and her shroud being her only garment,
She wrapped it closely round her.

'Unhand me, Father!' She cried, her honest indignation tempered by
alarm at her unprotected position; 'Why have you brought me to this
place?  Its appearance freezes me with horror!  Convey me from hence,
if you have the least sense of pity and humanity! Let me return to the
House which I have quitted I know not how; But stay here one moment
longer, I neither will, or ought.'

Though the Monk was somewhat startled by the resolute tone in which
this speech was delivered, it produced upon him no other effect than
surprize.  He caught her hand, forced her upon his knee, and gazing
upon her with gloting eyes, He thus replied to her.

'Compose yourself, Antonia.  Resistance is unavailing, and I need
disavow my passion for you no longer.  You are imagined dead: Society
is for ever lost to you.  I possess you here alone; You are absolutely
in my power, and I burn with desires which I must either gratify or
die:  But I would owe my happiness to yourself.  My lovely Girl!  My
adorable Antonia!  Let me instruct you in joys to which you are still a
Stranger, and teach you to feel those pleasures in my arms which I must
soon enjoy in yours.  Nay, this struggling is childish,' He continued,
seeing her repell his caresses, and endeavour to escape from his grasp;
'No aid is near:  Neither heaven or earth shall save you from my
embraces.  Yet why reject pleasures so sweet, so rapturous?  No one
observes us: Our loves will be a secret to all the world: Love and
opportunity invite your giving loose to your passions. Yield to them,
my Antonia!  Yield to them, my lovely Girl!  Throw your arms thus
fondly round me; Join your lips thus closely to mine!  Amidst all her
gifts, has Nature denied her most precious, the sensibility of
Pleasure?  Oh! impossible!  Every feature, look, and motion declares
you formed to bless, and to be blessed yourself!  Turn not on me those
supplicating eyes:  Consult your own charms; They will tell you that I
am proof against entreaty. Can I relinquish these limbs so white, so
soft, so delicate; These swelling breasts, round, full, and elastic!
These lips fraught with such inexhaustible sweetness?  Can I relinquish
these treasures, and leave them to another's enjoyment?  No, Antonia;
never, never!  I swear it by this kiss, and this! and this!'

With every moment the Friar's passion became more ardent, and Antonia's
terror more intense.  She struggled to disengage herself from his arms:
Her exertions were unsuccessful; and finding that Ambrosio's conduct
became still freer, She shrieked for assistance with all her strength.
The aspect of the Vault, the pale glimmering of the Lamp, the
surrounding obscurity, the sight of the Tomb, and the objects of
mortality which met her eyes on either side, were ill-calculated to
inspire her with those emotions by which the Friar was agitated.  Even
his caresses terrified her from their fury, and created no other
sentiment than fear.  On the contrary, her alarm, her evident disgust,
and incessant opposition, seemed only to inflame the Monk's desires,
and supply his brutality with additional strength.  Antonia's shrieks
were unheard:  Yet She continued them, nor abandoned her endeavours to
escape, till exhausted and out of breath She sank from his arms upon
her knees, and once more had recourse to prayers and supplications.
This attempt had no better success than the former.  On the contrary,
taking advantage of her situation, the Ravisher threw himself by her
side:  He clasped her to his bosom almost lifeless with terror, and
faint with struggling.  He stifled her cries with kisses, treated her
with the rudeness of an unprincipled Barbarian, proceeded from freedom
to freedom, and in the violence of his lustful delirium, wounded and
bruised her tender limbs.  Heedless of her tears, cries and entreaties,
He gradually made himself Master of her person, and desisted not from
his prey, till He had accomplished his crime and the dishonour of
Antonia.

Scarcely had He succeeded in his design than He shuddered at himself
and the means by which it was effected.  The very excess of his former
eagerness to possess Antonia now contributed to inspire him with
disgust; and a secret impulse made him feel how base and unmanly was
the crime which He had just committed.  He started hastily from her
arms.  She, who so lately had been the object of his adoration, now
raised no other sentiment in his heart than aversion and rage.  He
turned away from her; or if his eyes rested upon her figure
involuntarily, it was only to dart upon her looks of hate.  The
Unfortunate had fainted ere the completion of her disgrace: She only
recovered life to be sensible of her misfortune. She remained stretched
upon the earth in silent despair:  The tears chased each other slowly
down her cheeks, and her bosom heaved with frequent sobs.  Oppressed
with grief, She continued for some time in this state of torpidity. At
length She rose with difficulty, and dragging her feeble steps towards
the door, prepared to quit the dungeon.

The sound of her footsteps rouzed the Monk from his sullen apathy.
Starting from the Tomb against which He reclined, while his eyes
wandered over the images of corruption contained in it, He pursued the
Victim of his brutality, and soon overtook her. He seized her by the
arm, and violently forced her back into the dungeon.

'Whither go you?' He cried in a stern voice; 'Return this instant!'

Antonia trembled at the fury of his countenance.

'What, would you more?' She said with timidity: 'Is not my ruin
compleated?  Am I not undone, undone for ever?  Is not your cruelty
contented, or have I yet more to suffer?  Let me depart. Let me return
to my home, and weep unrestrained my shame and my affliction!'

'Return to your home?' repeated the Monk, with bitter and contemptuous
mockery; Then suddenly his eyes flaming with passion, 'What? That you
may denounce me to the world?  That you may proclaim me an Hypocrite, a
Ravisher, a Betrayer, a Monster of cruelty, lust, and ingratitude?  No,
no, no!  I know well the whole weight of my offences; Well that your
complaints would be too just, and my crimes too notorious!  You shall
not from hence to tell Madrid that I am a Villain; that my conscience
is loaded with sins which make me despair of Heaven's pardon. Wretched
Girl, you must stay here with me!  Here amidst these lonely Tombs,
these images of Death, these rotting loathsome corrupted bodies!  Here
shall you stay, and witness my sufferings; witness what it is to die in
the horrors of despondency, and breathe the last groan in blasphemy and
curses! And who am I to thank for this?  What seduced me into crimes,
whose bare remembrance makes me shudder?  Fatal Witch! was it not thy
beauty?  Have you not plunged my soul into infamy?  Have you not made
me a perjured Hypocrite, a Ravisher, an Assassin!  Nay, at this moment,
does not that angel look bid me despair of God's forgiveness?  Oh! when
I stand before his judgment-throne, that look will suffice to damn me!
You will tell my Judge that you were happy, till I saw you; that you
were innocent, till I polluted you!  You will come with those tearful
eyes, those cheeks pale and ghastly, those hands lifted in
supplication, as when you sought from me that mercy which I gave not!
Then will my perdition be certain!  Then will come your Mother's Ghost,
and hurl me down into the dwellings of Fiends, and flames, and Furies,
and everlasting torments!  And 'tis you, who will accuse me!  'Tis you,
who will cause my eternal anguish!  You, wretched Girl!  You!  You!'

As He thundered out these words, He violently grasped Antonia's arm,
and spurned the earth with delirious fury.

Supposing his brain to be turned, Antonia sank in terror upon her
knees:  She lifted up her hands, and her voice almost died away, ere
She could give it utterance.

'Spare me!  Spare me!' She murmured with difficulty.

'Silence!' cried the Friar madly, and dashed her upon the ground----

He quitted her, and paced the dungeon with a wild and disordered air.
His eyes rolled fearfully:  Antonia trembled whenever She met their
gaze.  He seemed to meditate on something horrible, and She gave up all
hopes of escaping from the Sepulchre with life. Yet in harbouring this
idea, She did him injustice.  Amidst the horror and disgust to which
his soul was a prey, pity for his Victim still held a place in it.  The
storm of passion once over, He would have given worlds had He possest
them, to have restored to her that innocence of which his unbridled
lust had deprived her.  Of the desires which had urged him to the
crime, no trace was left in his bosom:  The wealth of India would not
have tempted him to a second enjoyment of her person.  His nature
seemed to revolt at the very idea, and fain would He have wiped from
his memory the scene which had just past.  As his gloomy rage abated,
in proportion did his compassion augment for Antonia.  He stopped, and
would have spoken to her words of comfort; But He knew not from whence
to draw them, and remained gazing upon her with mournful wildness.  Her
situation seemed so hopeless, so woebegone, as to baffle mortal power
to relieve her.  What could He do for her?  Her peace of mind was lost,
her honour irreparably ruined.  She was cut off for ever from society,
nor dared He give her back to it.  He was conscious that were She to
appear in the world again, his guilt would be revealed, and his
punishment inevitable.  To one so laden with crimes, Death came armed
with double terrors.  Yet should He restore Antonia to light, and stand
the chance of her betraying him, how miserable a prospect would present
itself before her. She could never hope to be creditably established;
She would be marked with infamy, and condemned to sorrow and solitude
for the remainder of her existence.  What was the alternative?  A
resolution far more terrible for Antonia, but which at least would
insure the Abbot's safety.  He determined to leave the world persuaded
of her death, and to retain her a captive in this gloomy prison:  There
He proposed to visit her every night, to bring her food, to profess his
penitence, and mingle his tears with hers.  The Monk felt that this
resolution was unjust and cruel; but it was his only means to prevent
Antonia from publishing his guilt and her own infamy.  Should He
release her, He could not depend upon her silence:  His offence was too
flagrant to permit his hoping for her forgiveness.  Besides, her
reappearing would excite universal curiosity, and the violence of her
affliction would prevent her from concealing its cause. He determined
therefore, that Antonia should remain a Prisoner in the dungeon.

He approached her with confusion painted on his countenance.  He raised
her from the ground.  Her hand trembled, as He took it, and He dropped
it again as if He had touched a Serpent.  Nature seemed to recoil at
the touch.  He felt himself at once repulsed from and attracted towards
her, yet could account for neither sentiment.  There was something in
her look which penetrated him with horror; and though his understanding
was still ignorant of it, Conscience pointed out to him the whole
extent of his crime. In hurried accents yet the gentlest He could find,
while his eye was averted, and his voice scarcely audible, He strove to
console her under a misfortune which now could not be avoided.  He
declared himself sincerely penitent, and that He would gladly shed a
drop of his blood, for every tear which his barbarity had forced from
her.  Wretched and hopeless, Antonia listened to him in silent grief:
But when He announced her confinement in the Sepulchre, that dreadful
doom to which even death seemed preferable roused her from her
insensibility at once.  To linger out a life of misery in a narrow
loathsome Cell, known to exist by no human Being save her Ravisher,
surrounded by mouldering Corses, breathing the pestilential air of
corruption, never more to behold the light, or drink the pure gale of
heaven, the idea was more terrible than She could support. It conquered
even her abhorrence of the Friar. Again She sank upon her knees:  She
besought his compassion in terms the most pathetic and urgent. She
promised, would He but restore her to liberty, to conceal her injuries
from the world; to assign any reason for her reappearance which He
might judge proper; and in order to prevent the least suspicion from
falling upon him, She offered to quit Madrid immediately.  Her
entreaties were so urgent as to make a considerable impression upon the
Monk.  He reflected that as her person no longer excited his desires,
He had no interest in keeping her concealed as He had at first
intended; that He was adding a fresh injury to those which She had
already suffered; and that if She adhered to her promises, whether She
was confined or at liberty, his life and reputation were equally
secure.  On the other hand, He trembled lest in her affliction Antonia
should unintentionally break her engagement; or that her excessive
simplicity and ignorance of deceit should permit some one more artful
to surprize her secret.  However well-founded were these apprehensions,
compassion, and a sincere wish to repair his fault as much as possible
solicited his complying with the prayers of his Suppliant.  The
difficulty of colouring Antonia's unexpected return to life, after her
supposed death and public interment, was the only point which kept him
irresolute.  He was still pondering on the means of removing this
obstacle, when He heard the sound of feet approaching with
precipitation.  The door of the Vault was thrown open, and Matilda
rushed in, evidently much confused and terrified.

On seeing a Stranger enter, Antonia uttered a cry of joy:  But her
hopes of receiving succour from him were soon dissipated. The supposed
Novice, without expressing the least surprize at finding a Woman alone
with the Monk, in so strange a place, and at so late an hour, addressed
him thus without losing a moment.

'What is to be done, Ambrosio?  We are lost, unless some speedy means
is found of dispelling the Rioters.  Ambrosio, the Convent of St. Clare
is on fire; The Prioress has fallen a victim to the fury of the Mob.
Already is the Abbey menaced with a similar fate.  Alarmed at the
threats of the People, the Monks seek for you everywhere. They imagine
that your authority alone will suffice to calm this disturbance.  No
one knows what is become of you, and your absence creates universal
astonishment and despair.  I profited by the confusion, and fled hither
to warn you of the danger.'

'This will soon be remedied,' answered the Abbot; 'I will hasten back
to my Cell:  a trivial reason will account for my having been missed.'

'Impossible!' rejoined Matilda:  'The Sepulchre is filled with Archers.
Lorenzo de Medina, with several Officers of the Inquisition, searches
through the Vaults, and pervades every passage.  You will be
intercepted in your flight; Your reasons for being at this late hour in
the Sepulchre will be examined; Antonia will be found, and then you are
undone for ever!'

'Lorenzo de Medina?  Officers of the Inquisition? What brings them
here?  Seek they for me?  Am I then suspected?  Oh! speak, Matilda!
Answer me, in pity!'

'As yet they do not think of you, but I fear that they will ere long.
Your only chance of escaping their notice rests upon the difficulty of
exploring this Vault.  The door is artfully hidden:

Haply it may not be observed, and we may remain concealed till the
search is over.'

'But Antonia ..... Should the Inquisitors draw near, and her cries
be heard ....'

'Thus I remove that danger!' interrupted Matilda.

At the same time drawing a poignard, She rushed upon her devoted prey.

'Hold! Hold!' cried Ambrosio, seizing her hand, and wresting from it
the already lifted weapon.  'What would you do, cruel Woman? The
Unfortunate has already suffered but too much, thanks to your
pernicious consels!  Would to God that I had never followed them!
Would to God that I had never seen your face!'

Matilda darted upon him a look of scorn.

'Absurd!' She exclaimed with an air of passion and majesty which
impressed the Monk with awe.  'After robbing her of all that made it
dear, can you fear to deprive her of a life so miserable?  But 'tis
well!  Let her live to convince you of your folly.  I abandon you to
your evil destiny!  I disclaim your alliance!  Who trembles to commit
so insignificant a crime, deserves not my protection.  Hark!  Hark!
Ambrosio; Hear you not the Archers? They come, and your destruction is
inevitable!'

At this moment the Abbot heard the sound of distant voices.  He flew to
close the door on whose concealment his safety depended, and which
Matilda had neglected to fasten.  Ere He could reach it, He saw Antonia
glide suddenly by him, rush through the door, and fly towards the noise
with the swiftness of an arrow.  She had listened attentively to
Matilda:  She heard Lorenzo's name mentioned, and resolved to risque
every thing to throw herself under his protection.  The door was open.
The sounds convinced her that the Archers could be at no great
distance.  She mustered up her little remaining strength, rushed by the
Monk ere He perceived her design, and bent her course rapidly towards
the voices.  As soon as He recovered from his first surprize, the Abbot
failed not to pursue her.  In vain did Antonia redouble her speed, and
stretch every nerve to the utmost.  Her Enemy gained upon her every
moment:  She heard his steps close after her, and felt the heat of his
breath glow upon her neck.  He overtook her; He twisted his hand in the
ringlets of her streaming hair, and attempted to drag her back with him
to the dungeon.  Antonia resisted with all her strength:  She folded
her arms round a Pillar which supported the roof, and shrieked loudly
for assistance. In vain did the Monk strive to threaten her to silence.

'Help!' She continued to exclaim; 'Help! Help! for God's sake!'

Quickened by her cries, the sound of footsteps was heard approaching.
The Abbot expected every moment to see the Inquisitors arrive.  Antonia
still resisted, and He now enforced her silence by means the most
horrible and inhuman.  He still grasped Matilda's dagger: Without
allowing himself a moment's reflection, He raised it, and plunged it
twice in the bosom of Antonia!  She shrieked, and sank upon the ground.
The Monk endeavoured to bear her away with him, but She still embraced
the Pillar firmly.  At that instant the light of approaching Torches
flashed upon the Walls.  Dreading a discovery, Ambrosio was compelled
to abandon his Victim, and hastily fled back to the Vault, where He had
left Matilda.

He fled not unobserved.  Don Ramirez happening to arrive the first,
perceived a Female bleeding upon the ground, and a Man flying from the
spot, whose confusion betrayed him for the Murderer.  He instantly
pursued the Fugitive with some part of the Archers, while the Others
remained with Lorenzo to protect the wounded Stranger. They raised her,
and supported her in their arms.  She had fainted from excess of pain,
but soon gave signs of returning life.  She opened her eyes, and on
lifting up her head, the quantity of fair hair fell back which till
then had obscured her features.

'God Almighty!  It is Antonia!'

Such was Lorenzo's exclamation, while He snatched her from the
Attendant's arms, and clasped her in his own.

Though aimed by an uncertain hand, the poignard had answered but too
well the purpose of its Employer. The wounds were mortal, and Antonia
was conscious that She never could recover.  Yet the few moments which
remained for her were moments of happiness.  The concern exprest upon
Lorenzo's countenance, the frantic fondness of his complaints, and his
earnest enquiries respecting her wounds, convinced her beyond a doubt
that his affections were her own.  She would not be removed from the
Vaults, fearing lest motion should only hasten her death; and She was
unwilling to lose those moments which She past in receiving proofs of
Lorenzo's love, and assuring him of her own.  She told him that had She
still been undefiled She might have lamented the loss of life; But that
deprived of honour and branded with shame, Death was to her a blessing:
She could not have been his Wife, and that hope being denied her, She
resigned herself to the Grave without one sigh of regret.  She bad him
take courage, conjured him not to abandon himself to fruitless sorrow,
and declared that She mourned to leave nothing in the whole world but
him.  While every sweet accent increased rather than lightened
Lorenzo's grief, She continued to converse with him till the moment of
dissolution.  Her voice grew faint and scarcely audible; A thick cloud
spread itself over her eyes; Her heart beat slow and irregular, and
every instant seemed to announce that her fate was near at hand.

She lay, her head reclining upon Lorenzo's bosom, and her lips still
murmuring to him words of comfort.  She was interrupted by the Convent
Bell, as tolling at a distance, it struck the hour. Suddenly Antonia's
eyes sparkled with celestial brightness:  Her frame seemed to have
received new strength and animation.  She started from her Lover's arms.

'Three o'clock!' She cried; 'Mother, I come!'

She clasped her hands, and sank lifeless upon the ground. Lorenzo in
agony threw himself beside her:  He tore his hair, beat his breast, and
refused to be separated from the Corse.  At length his force being
exhausted, He suffered himself to be led from the Vault, and was
conveyed to the Palace de Medina scarcely more alive than the
unfortunate Antonia.

In the meanwhile, though closely pursued, Ambrosio succeeded in
regaining the Vault.  The Door was already fastened when Don Ramirez
arrived, and much time elapsed, ere the Fugitive's retreat was
discovered.  But nothing can resist perseverance. Though so artfully
concealed, the Door could not escape the vigilance of the Archers.
They forced it open, and entered the Vault to the infinite dismay of
Ambrosio and his Companion.  The Monk's confusion, his attempt to hide
himself, his rapid flight, and the blood sprinkled upon his cloaths,
left no room to doubt his being Antonia's Murderer.  But when He was
recognized for the immaculate Ambrosio, 'The Man of Holiness,' the Idol
of Madrid, the faculties of the Spectators were chained up in surprize,
and scarcely could they persuade themselves that what they saw was no
vision.  The Abbot strove not to vindicate himself, but preserved a
sullen silence.  He was secured and bound.  The same precaution was
taken with Matilda:  Her Cowl being removed, the delicacy of her
features and profusion of her golden hair betrayed her sex, and this
incident created fresh amazement.  The dagger was also found in the
Tomb, where the Monk had thrown it; and the dungeon having undergone a
thorough search, the two Culprits were conveyed to the prisons of the
Inquisition.

Don Ramirez took care that the populace should remain ignorant both of
the crimes and profession of the Captives.  He feared a repetition of
the riots which had followed the apprehending the Prioress of St.
Clare.  He contented himself with stating to the Capuchins the guilt of
their Superior.  To avoid the shame of a public accusation, and
dreading the popular fury from which they had already saved their Abbey
with much difficulty, the Monks readily permitted the Inquisitors to
search their Mansion without noise.  No fresh discoveries were made.
The effects found in the Abbot's and Matilda's Cells were seized, and
carried to the Inquisition to be produced in evidence.  Every thing
else remained in its former position, and order and tranquillity once
more prevailed through Madrid.

St. Clare's Convent was completely ruined by the united ravages of the
Mob and conflagration.  Nothing remained of it but the principal Walls,
whose thickness and solidity had preserved them from the flames.  The
Nuns who had belonged to it were obliged in consequence to disperse
themselves into other Societies:  But the prejudice against them ran
high, and the Superiors were very unwilling to admit them.  However,
most of them being related to Families the most distinguished for their
riches, birth and power, the several Convents were compelled to receive
them, though they did it with a very ill grace.  This prejudice was
extremely false and unjustifiable:  After a close investigation, it was
proved that All in the Convent were persuaded of the death of Agnes,
except the four Nuns whom St. Ursula had pointed out.  These had fallen
Victims to the popular fury; as had also several who were perfectly
innocent and unconscious of the whole affair.  Blinded by resentment,
the Mob had sacrificed every Nun who fell into their hands: They who
escaped were entirely indebted to the Duke de Medina's prudence and
moderation.  Of this they were conscious, and felt for that Nobleman a
proper sense of gratitude.

Virginia was not the most sparing of her thanks:  She wished equally to
make a proper return for his attentions, and to obtain the good graces
of Lorenzo's Uncle. In this She easily succeeded.

The Duke beheld her beauty with wonder and admiration; and while his
eyes were enchanted with her Form, the sweetness of her manners and her
tender concern for the suffering Nun prepossessed his heart in her
favour.  This Virginia had discernment enough to perceive, and She
redoubled her attention to the Invalid.  When He parted from her at the
door of her Father's Palace, the Duke entreated permission to enquire
occasionally after her health. His request was readily granted:
Virginia assured him that the Marquis de Villa-Franca would be proud of
an opportunity to thank him in person for the protection afforded to
her.  They now separated, He enchanted with her beauty and gentleness,
and She much pleased with him and more with his Nephew.

On entering the Palace, Virginia's first care was to summon the family
Physician, and take care of her unknown charge.  Her Mother hastened to
share with her the charitable office.  Alarmed by the riots, and
trembling for his Daughter's safety, who was his only child, the
Marquis had flown to St. Clare's Convent, and was still employed in
seeking her.  Messengers were now dispatched on all sides to inform him
that He would find her safe at his Hotel, and desire him to hasten
thither immediately. His absence gave Virginia liberty to bestow her
whole attention upon her Patient; and though much disordered herself by
the adventures of the night, no persuasion could induce her to quit the
bedside of the Sufferer.  Her constitution being much enfeebled by want
and sorrow, it was some time before the Stranger was restored to her
senses.  She found great difficulty in swallowing the medicines
prescribed to her:  But this obstacle being removed, She easily
conquered her disease which proceeded from nothing but weakness.  The
attention which was paid her, the wholesome food to which She had been
long a Stranger, and her joy at being restored to liberty, to society,
and, as She dared to hope, to Love, all this combined to her speedy
re-establishment.

From the first moment of knowing her, her melancholy situation, her
sufferings almost unparalleled had engaged the affections of her
amiable Hostess: Virginia felt for her the most lively interest; But
how was She delighted, when her Guest being sufficiently recovered to
relate her History, She recognized in the captive Nun the Sister of
Lorenzo!

This victim of monastic cruelty was indeed no other than the
unfortunate Agnes.  During her abode in the Convent, She had been well
known to Virginia:  But her emaciated form, her features altered by
affliction, her death universally credited, and her overgrown and
matted hair which hung over her face and bosom in disorder at first had
prevented her being recollected.  The Prioress had put every artifice
in practice to induce Virginia to take the veil; for the Heiress of
Villa-Franca would have been no despicable acquisition.  Her seeming
kindness and unremitted attention so far succeeded that her young
Relation began to think seriously upon compliance.  Better instructed
in the disgust and ennui of a monastic life, Agnes had penetrated the
designs of the Domina:  She trembled for the innocent Girl, and
endeavoured to make her sensible of her error.  She painted in their
true colours the numerous inconveniencies attached to a Convent, the
continued restraint, the low jealousies, the petty intrigues, the
servile court and gross flattery expected by the Superior.  She then
bad Virginia reflect on the brilliant prospect which presented itself
before her:  The Idol of her Parents, the admiration of Madrid, endowed
by nature and education with every perfection of person and mind, She
might look forward to an establishment the most fortunate.  Her riches
furnished her with the means of exercising in their fullest extent,
charity and benevolence, those virtues so dear to her; and her stay in
the world would enable her discovering Objects worthy her protection,
which could not be done in the seclusion of a Convent.

Her persuasions induced Virginia to lay aside all thoughts of the Veil:
But another argument, not used by Agnes, had more weight with her than
all the others put together.  She had seen Lorenzo, when He visited his
Sister at the Grate.  His Person pleased her, and her conversations
with Agnes generally used to terminate in some question about her
Brother.  She, who doted upon Lorenzo, wished for no better than an
opportunity to trumpet out his praise.  She spoke of him in terms of
rapture; and to convince her Auditor how just were his sentiments, how
cultivated his mind, and elegant his expressions, She showed her at
different times the letters which She received from him.  She soon
perceived that from these communications the heart of her young Friend
had imbibed impressions, which She was far from intending to give, but
was truly happy to discover.  She could not have wished her Brother a
more desirable union:  Heiress of Villa-Franca, virtuous, affectionate,
beautiful, and accomplished, Virginia seemed calculated to make him
happy.  She sounded her Brother upon the subject, though without
mentioning names or circumstances. He assured her in his answers that
his heart and hand were totally disengaged, and She thought that upon
these grounds She might proceed without danger. She in consequence
endeavoured to strengthen the dawning passion of her Friend.  Lorenzo
was made the constant topic of her discourse; and the avidity with
which her Auditor listened, the sighs which frequently escaped from her
bosom, and the eagerness with which upon any digression She brought
back the conversation to the subject whence it had wandered, sufficed
to convince Agnes that her Brother's addresses would be far from
disagreeable.  She at length ventured to mention her wishes to the
Duke:  Though a Stranger to the Lady herself, He knew enough of her
situation to think her worthy his Nephew's hand.  It was agreed between
him and his Niece, that She should insinuate the idea to Lorenzo, and
She only waited his return to Madrid to propose her Friend to him as
his Bride.  The unfortunate events which took place in the interim,
prevented her from executing her design.  Virginia wept her loss
sincerely, both as a Companion, and as the only Person to whom She
could speak of Lorenzo.  Her passion continued to prey upon her heart
in secret, and She had almost determined to confess her sentiments to
her Mother, when accident once more threw their object in her way.  The
sight of him so near her, his politeness, his compassion, his
intrepidity, had combined to give new ardour to her affection.  When
She now found her Friend and Advocate restored to her, She looked upon
her as a Gift from Heaven; She ventured to cherish the hope of being
united to Lorenzo, and resolved to use with him his Sister's influence.

Supposing that before her death Agnes might possibly have made the
proposal, the Duke had placed all his Nephew's hints of marriage to
Virginia's account: Consequently, He gave them the most favourable
reception. On returning to his Hotel, the relation given him of
Antonia's death, and Lorenzo's behaviour on the occasion, made evident
his mistake.  He lamented the circumstances; But the unhappy Girl being
effectually out of the way, He trusted that his designs would yet be
executed.  'Tis true that Lorenzo's situation just then ill-suited him
for a Bridegroom.  His hopes disappointed at the moment when He
expected to realize them, and the dreadful and sudden death of his
Mistress had affected him very severely.  The Duke found him upon the
Bed of sickness.  His Attendants expressed serious apprehensions for
his life; But the Uncle entertained not the same fears.  He was of
opinion, and not unwisely, that 'Men have died, and worms have eat
them; but not for Love!'  He therefore flattered himself that however
deep might be the impression made upon his Nephew's heart, Time and
Virginia would be able to efface it.  He now hastened to the afflicted
Youth, and endeavoured to console him: He sympathised in his distress,
but encouraged him to resist the encroachments of despair.  He allowed
that He could not but feel shocked at an event so terrible, nor could
He blame his sensibility; But He besought him not to torment himself
with vain regrets, and rather to struggle with affliction, and preserve
his life, if not for his own sake, at least for the sake of those who
were fondly attached to him. While He laboured thus to make Lorenzo
forget Antonia's loss, the Duke paid his court assiduously to Virginia,
and seized every opportunity to advance his Nephew's interest in her
heart.

It may easily be expected that Agnes was not long without enquiring
after Don Raymond.  She was shocked to hear the wretched situation to
which grief had reduced him; Yet She could not help exulting secretly,
when She reflected, that his illness proved the sincerity of his love.
The Duke undertook the office himself, of announcing to the Invalid the
happiness which awaited him.  Though He omitted no precaution to
prepare him for such an event, at this sudden change from despair to
happiness Raymond's transports were so violent, as nearly to have
proved fatal to him.  These once passed, the tranquillity of his mind,
the assurance of felicity, and above all the presence of Agnes, (Who
was no sooner reestablished by the care of Virginia and the
Marchioness, than She hastened to attend her Lover) soon enabled him to
overcome the effects of his late dreadful malady.  The calm of his soul
communicated itself to his body, and He recovered with such rapidity as
to create universal surprize.

No so Lorenzo.  Antonia's death accompanied with such terrible
circumstances weighed upon his mind heavily.  He was worn down to a
shadow.  Nothing could give him pleasure.  He was persuaded with
difficulty to swallow nourishment sufficient for the support of life,
and a consumption was apprehended.  The society of Agnes formed his
only comfort.  Though accident had never permitted their being much
together, He entertained for her a sincere friendship and attachment.
Perceiving how necessary She was to him, She seldom quitted his
chamber.  She listened to his complaints with unwearied attention, and
soothed him by the gentleness of her manners, and by sympathising with
his distress. She still inhabited the Palace de Villa-Franca, the
Possessors of which treated her with marked affection.  The Duke had
intimated to the Marquis his wishes respecting Virginia.  The match was
unexceptionable: Lorenzo was Heir to his Uncle's immense property, and
was distinguished in Madrid for his agreeable person, extensive
knowledge, and propriety of conduct:  Add to this, that the Marchioness
had discovered how strong was her Daughter's prepossession in his
favour.

In consequence the Duke's proposal was accepted without hesitation:
Every precaution was taken to induce Lorenzo's seeing the Lady with
those sentiments which She so well merited to excite.  In her visits to
her Brother Agnes was frequently accompanied by the Marchioness; and as
soon as He was able to move into his Antichamber, Virginia under her
mother's protection was sometimes permitted to express her wishes for
his recovery.  This She did with such delicacy, the manner in which She
mentioned Antonia was so tender and soothing, and when She lamented her
Rival's melancholy fate, her bright eyes shone so beautiful through her
tears, that Lorenzo could not behold, or listen to her without emotion.
His Relations, as well as the Lady, perceived that with every day her
society seemed to give him fresh pleasure, and that He spoke of her in
terms of stronger admiration.  However, they prudently kept their
observations to themselves.  No word was dropped which might lead him
to suspect their designs.  They continued their former conduct and
attention, and left Time to ripen into a warmer sentiment the
friendship which He already felt for Virginia.

In the mean while, her visits became more frequent; and latterly there
was scarce a day, of which She did not pass some part by the side of
Lorenzo's Couch.  He gradually regained his strength, but the progress
of his recovery was slow and doubtful.  One evening He seemed to be in
better spirits than usual:  Agnes and her Lover, the Duke, Virginia,
and her Parents were sitting round him.  He now for the first time
entreated his Sister to inform him how She had escaped the effects of
the poison which St. Ursula had seen her swallow.  Fearful of recalling
those scenes to his mind in which Antonia had perished, She had
hitherto concealed from him the history of her sufferings.  As He now
started the subject himself, and thinking that perhaps the narrative of
her sorrows might draw him from the contemplation of those on which He
dwelt too constantly, She immediately complied with his request.  The
rest of the company had already heard her story; But the interest which
all present felt for its Heroine made them anxious to hear it repeated.
The whole society seconding Lorenzo's entreaties, Agnes obeyed.  She
first recounted the discovery which had taken place in the Abbey
Chapel, the Domina's resentment, and the midnight scene of which St.
Ursula had been a concealed witness.  Though the Nun had already
described this latter event, Agnes now related it more circumstantially
and at large:  After which She proceeded in her narrative as follows.

      Conclusion of the History of Agnes de Medina

My supposed death was attended with the greatest agonies.  Those
moments which I believed my last, were embittered by the Domina's
assurances that I could not escape perdition; and as my eyes closed, I
heard her rage exhale itself in curses on my offence. The horror of
this situation, of a death-bed from which hope was banished, of a sleep
from which I was only to wake to find myself the prey of flames and
Furies, was more dreadful than I can describe.  When animation revived
in me, my soul was still impressed with these terrible ideas:  I looked
round with fear, expecting to behold the Ministers of divine vengeance.
For the first hour, my senses were so bewildered, and my brain so
dizzy, that I strove in vain to arrange the strange images which
floated in wild confusion before me.  If I endeavoured to raise myself
from the ground, the wandering of my head deceived me. Every thing
around me seemed to rock, and I sank once more upon the earth.  My weak
and dazzled eyes were unable to bear a nearer approach to a gleam of
light which I saw trembling above me.  I was compelled to close them
again, and remain motionless in the same posture.

A full hour elapsed, before I was sufficiently myself to examine the
surrounding Objects.  When I did examine them, what terror filled my
bosom I found myself extended upon a sort of wicker Couch:  It had six
handles to it, which doubtless had served the Nuns to convey me to my
grave.  I was covered with a linen cloth:

Several faded flowers were strown over me:  On one side lay a small
wooden Crucifix; On the other, a Rosary of large Beads. Four low narrow
walls confined me.  The top was also covered, and in it was practised a
small grated Door: Through this was admitted the little air which
circulated in this miserable place.  A faint glimmering of light which
streamed through the Bars, permitted me to distinguish the surrounding
horrors.  I was opprest by a noisome suffocating smell; and perceiving
that the grated door was unfastened, I thought that I might possibly
effect my escape.  As I raised myself with this design, my hand rested
upon something soft:  I grasped it, and advanced it towards the light.
Almighty God!  What was my disgust, my consternation!  In spite of its
putridity, and the worms which preyed upon it, I perceived a corrupted
human head, and recognised the features of a Nun who had died some
months before!

I threw it from me, and sank almost lifeless upon my Bier.

When my strength returned, this circumstance, and the consciousness of
being surrounded by the loathsome and mouldering Bodies of my
Companions, increased my desire to escape from my fearful prison.  I
again moved towards the light.  The grated door was within my reach: I
lifted it without difficulty; Probably it had been left unclosed to
facilitate my quitting the dungeon.  Aiding myself by the irregularity
of the Walls some of whose stones projected beyond the rest, I
contrived to ascend them, and drag myself out of my prison.  I now
found Myself in a Vault tolerably spacious.  Several Tombs, similar in
appearance to that whence I had just escaped, were ranged along the
sides in order, and seemed to be considerably sunk within the earth.  A
sepulchral Lamp was suspended from the roof by an iron chain, and shed
a gloomy light through the dungeon.  Emblems of Death were seen on
every side:  Skulls, shoulder-blades, thigh-bones, and other leavings
of Mortality were scattered upon the dewy ground. Each Tomb was
ornamented with a large Crucifix, and in one corner stood a wooden
Statue of St. Clare.  To these objects I at first paid no attention:  A
Door, the only outlet from the Vault, had attracted my eyes.  I
hastened towards it, having wrapped my winding-sheet closely round me.
I pushed against the door, and to my inexpressible terror found that it
was fastened on the outside.

I guessed immediately that the Prioress, mistaking the nature of the
liquor which She had compelled me to drink, instead of poison had
administered a strong Opiate.  From this I concluded that being to all
appearance dead I had received the rites of burial; and that deprived
of the power of making my existence known, it would be my fate to
expire of hunger.  This idea penetrated me with horror, not merely for
my own sake, but that of the innocent Creature, who still lived within
my bosom.  I again endeavoured to open the door, but it resisted all my
efforts.  I stretched my voice to the extent of its compass, and
shrieked for aid:  I was remote from the hearing of every one:  No
friendly voice replied to mine.  A profound and melancholy silence
prevailed through the Vault, and I despaired of liberty.  My long
abstinence from food now began to torment me.  The tortures which
hunger inflicted on me, were the most painful and insupportable: Yet
they seemed to increase with every hour which past over my head.
Sometimes I threw myself upon the ground, and rolled upon it wild and
desperate:  Sometimes starting up, I returned to the door, again strove
to force it open, and repeated my fruitless cries for succour. Often
was I on the point of striking my temple against the sharp corner of
some Monument, dashing out my brains, and thus terminating my woes at
once; But still the remembrance of my Baby vanquished my resolution: I
trembled at a deed which equally endangered my Child's existence and my
own.  Then would I vent my anguish in loud exclamations and passionate
complaints; and then again my strength failing me, silent and hopeless
I would sit me down upon the base of St. Clare's Statue, fold my arms,
and abandon myself to sullen despair.  Thus passed several wretched
hours.  Death advanced towards me with rapid strides, and I expected
that every succeeding moment would be that of my dissolution.  Suddenly
a neighbouring Tomb caught my eye:  A Basket stood upon it, which till
then I had not observed.  I started from my seat:  I made towards it as
swiftly as my exhausted frame would permit.  How eagerly did I seize
the Basket, on finding it to contain a loaf of coarse bread and a small
bottle of water.

I threw myself with avidity upon these humble aliments. They had to all
appearance been placed in the Vault for several days; The bread was
hard, and the water tainted; Yet never did I taste food to me so
delicious.  When the cravings of appetite were satisfied, I busied
myself with conjectures upon this new circumstance: I debated whether
the Basket had been placed there with a view to my necessity.  Hope
answered my doubts in the affirmative.  Yet who could guess me to be in
need of such assistance?  If my existence was known, why was I detained
in this gloomy Vault?  If I was kept a Prisoner, what meant the
ceremony of committing me to the Tomb?  Or if I was doomed to perish
with hunger, to whose pity was I indebted for provisions placed within
my reach?  A Friend would not have kept my dreadful punishment a
secret; Neither did it seem probable that an Enemy would have taken
pains to supply me with the means of existence. Upon the whole I was
inclined to think that the Domina's designs upon my life had been
discovered by some one of my Partizans in the Convent, who had found
means to substitute an opiate for poison: That She had furnished me
with food to support me, till She could effect my delivery:  And that
She was then employed in giving intelligence to my Relations of my
danger, and pointing out a way to release me from captivity.  Yet why
then was the quality of my provisions so coarse?  How could my Friend
have entered the Vault without the Domina's knowledge?  And if She had
entered, why was the Door fastened so carefully?  These reflections
staggered me:  Yet still this idea was the most favourable to my hopes,
and I dwelt upon it in preference.

My meditations were interrupted by the sound of distant footsteps.
They approached, but slowly.  Rays of light now darted through the
crevices of the Door. Uncertain whether the Persons who advanced came
to relieve me, or were conducted by some other motive to the Vault, I
failed not to attract their notice by loud cries for help.  Still the
sounds drew near:  The light grew stronger:  At length with
inexpressible pleasure I heard the Key turning in the Lock.  Persuaded
that my deliverance was at hand, I flew towards the Door with a shriek
of joy.  It opened:  But all my hopes of escape died away, when the
Prioress appeared followed by the same four Nuns, who had been
witnesses of my supposed death.  They bore torches in their hands, and
gazed upon me in fearful silence.

I started back in terror.  The Domina descended into the Vault, as did
also her Companions.  She bent upon me a stern resentful eye, but
expressed no surprize at finding me still living.  She took the seat
which I had just quitted: The door was again closed, and the Nuns
ranged themselves behind their Superior, while the glare of their
torches, dimmed by the vapours and dampness of the Vault, gilded with
cold beams the surrounding Monuments.  For some moments all preserved a
dead and solemn silence.  I stood at some distance from the Prioress.
At length She beckoned me to advance.  Trembling at the severity of her
aspect my strength scarce sufficed me to obey her.  I drew near, but my
limbs were unable to support their burthen.  I sank upon my knees; I
clasped my hands, and lifted them up to her for mercy, but had no power
to articulate a syllable.

She gazed upon me with angry eyes.

'Do I see a Penitent, or a Criminal?' She said at length; 'Are those
hands raised in contrition for your crimes, or in fear of meeting their
punishment?  Do those tears acknowledge the justice of your doom, or
only solicit mitigation of your sufferings?  I fear me, 'tis the
latter!'

She paused, but kept her eye still fixt upon mine.

'Take courage;' She continued:  'I wish not for your death, but your
repentance.  The draught which I administered, was no poison, but an
opiate.  My intention in deceiving you was to make you feel the agonies
of a guilty conscience, had Death overtaken you suddenly while your
crimes were still unrepented. You have suffered those agonies:  I have
brought you to be familiar with the sharpness of death, and I trust
that your momentary anguish will prove to you an eternal benefit.  It
is not my design to destroy your immortal soul; or bid you seek the
grave, burthened with the weight of sins unexpiated.  No, Daughter, far
from it:  I will purify you with wholesome chastisement, and furnish
you with full leisure for contrition and remorse.  Hear then my
sentence; The ill-judged zeal of your Friends delayed its execution,
but cannot now prevent it.  All Madrid believes you to be no more; Your
Relations are thoroughly persuaded of your death, and the Nuns your
Partizans have assisted at your funeral.  Your existence can never be
suspected; I have taken such precautions, as must render it an
impenetrable mystery.  Then abandon all thoughts of a World from which
you are eternally separated, and employ the few hours which are allowed
you, in preparing for the next.'

This exordium led me to expect something terrible.  I trembled, and
would have spoken to deprecate her wrath: but a motion of the Domina
commanded me to be silent.  She proceeded.

'Though of late years unjustly neglected, and now opposed by many of
our misguided Sisters, (whom Heaven convert!) it is my intention to
revive the laws of our order in their full force. That against
incontinence is severe, but no more than so monstrous an offence
demands: Submit to it, Daughter, without resistance; You will find the
benefit of patience and resignation in a better life than this.  Listen
then to the sentence of St. Clare.  Beneath these Vaults there exist
Prisons, intended to receive such criminals as yourself:  Artfully is
their entrance concealed, and She who enters them, must resign all
hopes of liberty.  Thither must you now be conveyed.  Food shall be
supplied you, but not sufficient for the indulgence of appetite: You
shall have just enough to keep together body and soul, and its quality
shall be the simplest and coarsest.  Weep, Daughter, weep, and moisten
your bread with your tears:  God knows that you have ample cause for
sorrow!  Chained down in one of these secret dungeons, shut out from
the world and light for ever, with no comfort but religion, no society
but repentance, thus must you groan away the remainder of your days.
Such are St. Clare's orders; Submit to them without repining.  Follow
me!'

Thunderstruck at this barbarous decree, my little remaining strength
abandoned me.  I answered only by falling at her feet, and bathing them
with tears.  The Domina, unmoved by my affliction, rose from her seat
with a stately air.  She repeated her commands in an absolute tone:
But my excessive faintness made me unable to obey her.  Mariana and
Alix raised me from the ground, and carried me forwards in their arms.
The Prioress moved on, leaning upon Violante, and Camilla preceded her
with a Torch.  Thus passed our sad procession along the passages, in
silence only broken by my sighs and groans.  We stopped before the
principal shrine of St. Clare.  The Statue was removed from its
Pedestal, though how I knew not.  The Nuns afterwards raised an iron
grate till then concealed by the Image, and let it fall on the other
side with a loud crash.  The awful sound, repeated by the vaults above,
and Caverns below me, rouzed me from the despondent apathy in which I
had been plunged.  I looked before me:  An abyss presented itself to my
affrighted eyes, and a steep and narrow Staircase, whither my
Conductors were leading me.  I shrieked, and started back.  I implored
compassion, rent the air with my cries, and summoned both heaven and
earth to my assistance.  In vain! I was hurried down the Staircase, and
forced into one of the Cells which lined the Cavern's sides.

My blood ran cold, as I gazed upon this melancholy abode.  The cold
vapours hovering in the air, the walls green with damp, the bed of
Straw so forlorn and comfortless, the Chain destined to bind me for
ever to my prison, and the Reptiles of every description which as the
torches advanced towards them, I descried hurrying to their retreats,
struck my heart with terrors almost too exquisite for nature to bear.
Driven by despair to madness, I burst suddenly from the Nuns who held
me:  I threw myself upon my knees before the Prioress, and besought her
mercy in the most passionate and frantic terms.

'If not on me,' said I, 'look at least with pity on that innocent
Being, whose life is attached to mine!  Great is my crime, but let not
my Child suffer for it!  My Baby has committed no fault: Oh! spare me
for the sake of my unborn Offspring, whom ere it tastes life your
severity dooms to destruction!'

The Prioress drew back haughtily:  She forced her habit from my grasp,
as if my touch had been contagious.

'What?' She exclaimed with an exasperated air; 'What?  Dare you plead
for the produce of your shame?  Shall a Creature be permitted to live,
conceived in guilt so monstrous?  Abandoned Woman, speak for him no
more!  Better that the Wretch should perish than live: Begotten in
perjury, incontinence, and pollution, It cannot fail to prove a Prodigy
of vice.  Hear me, thou Guilty!  Expect no mercy from me either for
yourself, or Brat.  Rather pray that Death may seize you before you
produce it; Or if it must see the light, that its eyes may immediately
be closed again for ever!  No aid shall be given you in your labour;
Bring your Offspring into the world yourself, Feed it yourself, Nurse
it yourself, Bury it yourself:  God grant that the latter may happen
soon, lest you receive comfort from the fruit of your iniquity!'

This inhuman speech, the threats which it contained, the dreadful
sufferings foretold to me by the Domina, and her prayers for my
Infant's death, on whom though unborn I already doated, were more than
my exhausted frame could support.  Uttering a deep groan, I fell
senseless at the feet of my unrelenting Enemy.  I know not how long I
remained in this situation; But I imagine that some time must have
elapsed before my recovery, since it sufficed the Prioress and her Nuns
to quit the Cavern. When my senses returned, I found myself in silence
and solitude.  I heard not even the retiring footsteps of my
Persecutors.  All was hushed, and all was dreadful!  I had been thrown
upon the bed of Straw: The heavy Chain which I had already eyed with
terror, was wound around my waist, and fastened me to the Wall.  A Lamp
glimmering with dull, melancholy rays through my dungeon, permitted my
distinguishing all its horrors:  It was separated from the Cavern by a
low and irregular Wall of Stone: A large Chasm was left open in it
which formed the entrance, for door there was none.  A leaden Crucifix
was in front of my straw Couch.  A tattered rug lay near me, as did
also a Chaplet of Beads; and not far from me stood a pitcher of water,
and a wicker Basket containing a small loaf, and a bottle of oil to
supply my Lamp.

With a despondent eye did I examine this scene of suffering: When I
reflected that I was doomed to pass in it the remainder of my days, my
heart was rent with bitter anguish.  I had once been taught to look
forward to a lot so different!  At one time my prospects had appeared
so bright, so flattering!  Now all was lost to me.  Friends, comfort,
society, happiness, in one moment I was deprived of all!  Dead to the
world, Dead to pleasure, I lived to nothing but the sense of misery.
How fair did that world seem to me, from which I was for ever excluded!
How many loved objects did it contain, whom I never should behold
again! As I threw a look of terror round my prison, as I shrunk from
the cutting wind which howled through my subterraneous dwelling, the
change seemed so striking, so abrupt, that I doubted its reality.

That the Duke de Medina's Niece, that the destined Bride of the Marquis
de las Cisternas, One bred up in affluence, related to the noblest
families in Spain, and rich in a multitude of affectionate Friends,
that She should in one moment become a Captive, separated from the
world for ever, weighed down with chains, and reduced to support life
with the coarsest aliments, appeared a change so sudden and incredible,
that I believed myself the sport of some frightful vision.  Its
continuance convinced me of my mistake with but too much certainty.
Every morning my hopes were disappointed.  At length I abandoned all
idea of escaping:  I resigned myself to my fate, and only expected
Liberty when She came the Companion of Death.

My mental anguish, and the dreadful scenes in which I had been an
Actress, advanced the period of my labour.  In solitude and misery,
abandoned by all, unassisted by Art, uncomforted by Friendship, with
pangs which if witnessed would have touched the hardest heart, was I
delivered of my wretched burthen.  It came alive into the world; But I
knew not how to treat it, or by what means to preserve its existence.
I could only bathe it with tears, warm it in my bosom, and offer up
prayers for its safety. I was soon deprived of this mournful
employment:  The want of proper attendance, my ignorance how to nurse
it, the bitter cold of the dungeon, and the unwholesome air which
inflated its lungs, terminated my sweet Babe's short and painful
existence.  It expired in a few hours after its birth, and I witnessed
its death with agonies which beggar all description.

But my grief was unavailing.  My Infant was no more; nor could all my
sighs impart to its little tender frame the breath of a moment.  I rent
my winding-sheet, and wrapped in it my lovely Child.  I placed it on my
bosom, its soft arm folded round my neck, and its pale cold cheek
resting upon mine.  Thus did its lifeless limbs repose, while I covered
it with kisses, talked to it, wept, and moaned over it without
remission, day or night. Camilla entered my prison regularly once every
twenty-four hours, to bring me food.  In spite of her flinty nature,
She could not behold this spectacle unmoved.  She feared that grief so
excessive would at length turn my brain, and in truth I was not always
in my proper senses.  From a principle of compassion She urged me to
permit the Corse to be buried:  But to this I never would consent.  I
vowed not to part with it while I had life: Its presence was my only
comfort, and no persuasion could induce me to give it up. It soon
became a mass of putridity, and to every eye was a loathsome and
disgusting Object; To every eye but a Mother's.  In vain did human
feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality with repugnance:
I withstood, and vanquished that repugnance.  I persisted in holding my
Infant to my bosom, in lamenting it, loving it, adoring it!  Hour after
hour have I passed upon my sorry Couch, contemplating what had once
been my Child:  I endeavoured to retrace its features through the livid
corruption, with which they were overspread: During my confinement this
sad occupation was my only delight; and at that time Worlds should not
have bribed me to give it up. Even when released from my prison, I
brought away my Child in my arms.  The representations of my two kind
Friends,"--(Here She took the hands of the Marchioness and Virginia,
and pressed them alternately to her lips)--"at length persuaded me to
resign my unhappy Infant to the Grave.  Yet I parted from it with
reluctance:  However, reason at length prevailed; I suffered it to be
taken from me, and it now reposes in consecrated ground.

I before mentioned that regularly once a day Camilla brought me food.
She sought not to embitter my sorrows with reproach:  She bad me, 'tis
true, resign all hopes of liberty and worldly happiness; But She
encouraged me to bear with patience my temporary distress, and advised
me to draw comfort from religion.

My situation evidently affected her more than She ventured to express:
But She believed that to extenuate my fault would make me less anxious
to repent it.  Often while her lips painted the enormity of my guilt in
glaring colours, her eyes betrayed, how sensible She was to my
sufferings.  In fact I am certain that none of my Tormentors, (for the
three other Nuns entered my prison occasionally) were so much actuated
by the spirit of oppressive cruelty as by the idea that to afflict my
body was the only way to preserve my soul.  Nay, even this persuasion
might not have had such weight with them, and they might have thought
my punishment too severe, had not their good dispositions been represt
by blind obedience to their Superior.  Her resentment existed in full
force.  My project of elopement having been discovered by the Abbot of
the Capuchins, She supposed herself lowered in his opinion by my
disgrace, and in consequence her hate was inveterate.  She told the
Nuns to whose custody I was committed that my fault was of the most
heinous nature, that no sufferings could equal the offence, and that
nothing could save me from eternal perdition but punishing my guilt
with the utmost severity.  The Superior's word is an oracle to but too
many of a Convent's Inhabitants.  The Nuns believed whatever the
Prioress chose to assert:  Though contradicted by reason and charity,
they hesitated not to admit the truth of her arguments. They followed
her injunctions to the very letter, and were fully persuaded that to
treat me with lenity, or to show the least pity for my woes, would be a
direct means to destroy my chance for salvation.

Camilla, being most employed about me, was particularly charged by the
Prioress to treat me with harshness. In compliance with these orders,
She frequently strove to convince me, how just was my punishment, and
how enormous was my crime:  She bad me think myself too happy in saving
my soul by mortifying my body, and even threatened me sometimes with
eternal perdition.  Yet as I before observed, She always concluded by
words of encouragement and comfort; and though uttered by Camilla's
lips, I easily recognised the Domina's expressions.  Once, and once
only, the Prioress visited me in my dungeon.  She then treated me with
the most unrelenting cruelty:  She loaded me with reproaches, taunted
me with my frailty, and when I implored her mercy, told me to ask it of
heaven, since I deserved none on earth.  She even gazed upon my
lifeless Infant without emotion; and when She left me, I heard her
charge Camilla to increase the hardships of my Captivity.  Unfeeling
Woman!  But let me check my resentment: She has expiated her errors by
her sad and unexpected death. Peace be with her; and may her crimes be
forgiven in heaven, as I forgive her my sufferings on earth!

Thus did I drag on a miserable existence.  Far from growing familiar
with my prison, I beheld it every moment with new horror.  The cold
seemed more piercing and bitter, the air more thick and pestilential.
My frame became weak, feverish, and emaciated.  I was unable to rise
from the bed of Straw, and exercise my limbs in the narrow limits, to
which the length of my chain permitted me to move.  Though exhausted,
faint, and weary, I trembled to profit by the approach of Sleep:  My
slumbers were constantly interrupted by some obnoxious Insect crawling
over me.

Sometimes I felt the bloated Toad, hideous and pampered with the
poisonous vapours of the dungeon, dragging his loathsome length along
my bosom:  Sometimes the quick cold Lizard rouzed me leaving his slimy
track upon my face, and entangling itself in the tresses of my wild and
matted hair:  Often have I at waking found my fingers ringed with the
long worms which bred in the corrupted flesh of my Infant.  At such
times I shrieked with terror and disgust, and while I shook off the
reptile, trembled with all a Woman's weakness.

Such was my situation, when Camilla was suddenly taken ill.  A
dangerous fever, supposed to be infectious, confined her to her bed.
Every one except the Lay-Sister appointed to nurse her, avoided her
with caution, and feared to catch the disease.  She was perfectly
delirious, and by no means capable of attending to me.  The Domina and
the Nuns admitted to the mystery, had latterly given me over entirely
to Camilla's care:  In consequence, they busied themselves no more
about me; and occupied by preparing for the approaching Festival, it is
more than probable that I never once entered into their thoughts.  Of
the reason of Camilla's negligence, I have been informed since my
release by the Mother St. Ursula; At that time I was very far from
suspecting its cause.  On the contrary, I waited for my Gaoler's
appearance at first with impatience, and afterwards with despair. One
day passed away; Another followed it; The Third arrived.  Still no
Camilla!  Still no food!  I knew the lapse of time by the wasting of my
Lamp, to supply which fortunately a week's supply of Oil had been left
me.  I supposed, either that the Nuns had forgotten me, or that the
Domina had ordered them to let me perish.  The latter idea seemed the
most probable; Yet so natural is the love of life, that I trembled to
find it true. Though embittered by every species of misery, my
existence was still dear to me, and I dreaded to lose it.  Every
succeeding minute proved to me that I must abandon all hopes of relief.
I was become an absolute skeleton:  My eyes already failed me, and my
limbs were beginning to stiffen.  I could only express my anguish, and
the pangs of that hunger which gnawed my heart-strings, by frequent
groans, whose melancholy sound the vaulted roof of the dungeon
re-echoed.  I resigned myself to my fate:  I already expected the
moment of dissolution, when my Guardian Angel, when my beloved Brother
arrived in time to save me.  My sight grown dim and feeble at first
refused to recognize him; and when I did distinguish his features, the
sudden burst of rapture was too much for me to bear.  I was overpowered
by the swell of joy at once more beholding a Friend, and that a Friend
so dear to me.  Nature could not support my emotions, and took her
refuge in insensibility.

You already know, what are my obligations to the Family of
Villa-Franca:  But what you cannot know is the extent of my gratitude,
boundless as the excellence of my Benefactors. Lorenzo!  Raymond!
Names so dear to me!  Teach me to bear with fortitude this sudden
transition from misery to bliss.  So lately a Captive, opprest with
chains, perishing with hunger, suffering every inconvenience of cold
and want, hidden from the light, excluded from society, hopeless,
neglected, and as I feared, forgotten; Now restored to life and
liberty, enjoying all the comforts of affluence and ease, surrounded by
those who are most loved by me, and on the point of becoming his Bride
who has long been wedded to my heart, my happiness is so exquisite, so
perfect, that scarcely can my brain sustain the weight.  One only wish
remains ungratified:  It is to see my Brother in his former health, and
to know that Antonia's memory is buried in her grave.

Granted this prayer, I have nothing more to desire.  I trust, that my
past sufferings have purchased from heaven the pardon of my momentary
weakness. That I have offended, offended greatly and grievously, I am
fully conscious; But let not my Husband, because He once conquered my
virtue, doubt the propriety of my future conduct.  I have been frail
and full of error:  But I yielded not to the  warmth of constitution;
Raymond, affection for you betrayed me.  I was too confident of my
strength; But I depended no less on your honour than my own.  I had
vowed never to see you more:  Had it not been for the consequences of
that unguarded moment, my resolution had been kept.  Fate willed it
otherwise, and I cannot but rejoice at its decree.  Still my conduct
has been highly blameable, and while I attempt to justify myself, I
blush at recollecting my imprudence.  Let me then dismiss the
ungrateful subject; First assuring you, Raymond, that you shall have no
cause to repent our union, and that the more culpable have been the
errors of your Mistress, the more exemplary shall be the conduct of
your Wife.

Here Agnes ceased, and the Marquis replied to her address in terms
equally sincere and affectionate. Lorenzo expressed his satisfaction at
the prospect of being so closely connected with a Man for whom He had
ever entertained the highest esteem.  The Pope's Bull had fully and
effectually released Agnes from her religious engagements:  The
marriage was therefore celebrated as soon as the needful preparations
had been made, for the Marquis wished to have the ceremony performed
with all possible splendour and publicity.  This being over, and the
Bride having received the compliments of Madrid, She departed with Don
Raymond for his Castle in Andalusia:  Lorenzo accompanied them, as did
also the Marchioness de Villa-Franca and her lovely Daughter.  It is
needless to say that Theodore was of the party, and would be impossible
to describe his joy at his Master's marriage. Previous to his
departure, the Marquis, to atone in some measure for his past neglect,
made some enquiries relative to Elvira. Finding that She as well as her
Daughter had received many services from Leonella and Jacintha, He
showed his respect to the memory of his Sister-in-law by making the two
Women handsome presents.  Lorenzo followed his example--Leonella was
highly flattered by the attentions of Noblemen so distinguished, and
Jacintha blessed the hour on which her House was bewitched.

On her side, Agnes failed not to reward her Convent Friends. The worthy
Mother St. Ursula, to whom She owed her liberty, was named at her
request Superintendent of 'The Ladies of Charity:' This was one of the
best and most opulent Societies throughout Spain.  Bertha and Cornelia
not choosing to quit their Friend, were appointed to principal charges
in the same establishment. As to the Nuns who had aided the Domina in
persecuting Agnes, Camilla being confined by illness to her bed, had
perished in the flames which consumed St. Clare's Convent.  Mariana,
Alix, and Violante, as well as two more, had fallen victims to the
popular rage.  The three Others who in Council had supported the
Domina's sentence, were severely reprimanded, and banished to religious
Houses in obscure and distant Provinces:  Here they languished away a
few years, ashamed of their former weakness, and shunned by their
Companions with aversion and contempt.

Nor was the fidelity of Flora permitted to go unrewarded. Her wishes
being consulted, She declared herself impatient to revisit her native
land.  In consequence, a passage was procured for her to Cuba, where
She arrived in safety, loaded with the presents of Raymond and Lorenzo.

The debts of gratitude discharged, Agnes was at liberty to pursue her
favourite plan.  Lodged in the same House, Lorenzo and Virginia were
eternally together. The more He saw of her, the more was He convinced
of her merit.  On her part, She laid herself out to please, and not to
succeed was for her impossible.

Lorenzo witnessed with admiration her beautiful person, elegant
manners, innumerable talents, and sweet disposition:  He was also much
flattered by her prejudice in his favour, which She had not sufficient
art to conceal.  However, his sentiments partook not of that ardent
character which had marked his affection for Antonia.  The image of
that lovely and unfortunate Girl still lived in his heart, and baffled
all Virginia's efforts to displace it.  Still when the Duke proposed to
him the match, which He wished to earnestly to take place, his Nephew
did not reject the offer.  The urgent supplications of his Friends, and
the Lady's merit conquered his repugnance to entering into new
engagements. He proposed himself to the Marquis de Villa-Franca, and
was accepted with joy and gratitude.  Virginia became his Wife, nor did
She ever give him cause to repent his choice.  His esteem increased for
her daily.  Her unremitted endeavours to please him could not but
succeed.  His affection assumed stronger and warmer colours.  Antonia's
image was gradually effaced from his bosom; and Virginia became sole
Mistress of that heart, which She well deserved to possess without a
Partner.

The remaining years of Raymond and Agnes, of Lorenzo and Virginia, were
happy as can be those allotted to Mortals, born to be the prey of
grief, and sport of disappointment.  The exquisite sorrows with which
they had been afflicted, made them think lightly of every succeeding
woe.  They had felt the sharpest darts in misfortune's quiver; Those
which remained appeared blunt in comparison.  Having weathered Fate's
heaviest Storms, they looked calmly upon its terrors: or if ever they
felt Affliction's casual gales, they seemed to them gentle as Zephyrs
which breathe over summer-seas.