II

  Oh! could I worship aught beneath the skies
  That earth hath seen or fancy could devise,
  Thine altar, sacred Liberty, should stand,
  Built by no mercenary vulgar hand,
  With fragrant turf, and flowers as wild and fair,
  As ever dressed a bank, or scented summer air.
               Cowper.

His whole attention bent upon bringing to justice the Assassins of his
Sister, Lorenzo little thought how severely his interest was suffering
in another quarter.  As was before mentioned, He returned not to Madrid
till the evening of that day on which Antonia was buried. Signifying to
the Grand Inquisitor the order of the Cardinal-Duke (a ceremony not to
be neglected, when a Member of the Church was to be arrested publicly)
communicating his design to his Uncle and Don Ramirez, and assembling a
troop of Attendants sufficiently to prevent opposition, furnished him
with full occupation during the few hours preceding midnight.
Consequently, He had no opportunity to enquire about his Mistress, and
was perfectly ignorant both of her death and her Mother's.

The Marquis was by no means out of danger:  His delirium was gone, but
had left him so much exhausted that the Physicians declined pronouncing
upon the consequences likely to ensue.  As for Raymond himself, He
wished for nothing more earnestly than to join Agnes in the grave.
Existence was hateful to him:  He saw nothing in the world deserving
his attention; and He hoped to hear that Agnes was revenged, and
himself given over in the same moment.

Followed by Raymond's ardent prayers for success, Lorenzo was at the
Gates of St. Clare a full hour before the time appointed by the Mother
St. Ursula.  He was accompanied by his Uncle, by Don Ramirez de Mello,
and a party of chosen Archers.  Though in considerable numbers their
appearance created no surprize:  A great Crowd was already assembled
before the Convent doors, in order to witness the Procession.  It was
naturally supposed that Lorenzo and his Attendants were conducted
thither by the same design.  The Duke of Medina being recognised, the
People drew back, and made way for his party to advance.  Lorenzo
placed himself opposite to the great Gate, through which the Pilgrims
were to pass. Convinced that the Prioress could not escape him, He
waited patiently for her appearance, which She was expected to make
exactly at Midnight.

The Nuns were employed in religious duties established in honour of St.
Clare, and to which no Prophane was ever admitted.  The Chapel windows
were illuminated. As they stood on the outside, the Auditors heard the
full swell of the organ, accompanied by a chorus of female voices, rise
upon the stillness of the night. This died away, and was succeeded by a
single strain of harmony: It was the voice of her who was destined to
sustain in the procession the character of St. Clare.  For this office
the most beautiful Virgin of Madrid was always selected, and She upon
whom the choice fell esteemed it as the highest of honours.  While
listening to the Music, whose melody distance only seemed to render
sweeter, the Audience was wrapped up in profound attention.  Universal
silence prevailed through the Crowd, and every heart was filled with
reverence for religion.  Every heart but Lorenzo's.  Conscious that
among those who chaunted the praises of their God so sweetly, there
were some who cloaked with devotion the foulest sins, their hymns
inspired him with detestation at their Hypocrisy.  He had long observed
with disapprobation and contempt the superstition which governed
Madrid's Inhabitants.  His good sense had pointed out to him the
artifices of the Monks, and the gross absurdity of their miracles,
wonders, and supposititious reliques.  He blushed to see his Countrymen
the Dupes of deceptions so ridiculous, and only wished for an
opportunity to free them from their monkish fetters.  That opportunity,
so long desired in vain, was at length presented to him.  He resolved
not to let it slip, but to set before the People in glaring colours how
enormous were the abuses but too frequently practised in Monasteries,
and how unjustly public esteem was bestowed indiscriminately upon all
who wore a religious habit.  He longed for the moment destined to
unmask the Hypocrites, and convince his Countrymen that a sanctified
exterior does not always hide a virtuous heart.

The service lasted, till Midnight was announced by the Convent Bell.
That sound being heard, the Music ceased:  The voices died away softly,
and soon after the lights disappeared from the Chapel windows.
Lorenzo's heart beat high, when He found the execution of his plan to
be at hand.  From the natural superstition of the People He had
prepared himself for some resistance.  But He trusted that the Mother
St. Ursula would bring good reasons to justify his proceeding.  He had
force with him to repel the first impulse of the Populace, till his
arguments should be heard:  His only fear was lest the Domina,
suspecting his design, should have spirited away the Nun on whose
deposition every thing depended.  Unless the Mother St. Ursula should
be present, He could only accuse the Prioress upon suspicion; and this
reflection gave him some little apprehension for the success of his
enterprize.  The tranquillity which seemed to reign through the Convent
in some degree re-assured him: Still He expected the moment eagerly,
when the presence of his Ally should deprive him of the power of
doubting.

The Abbey of Capuchins was only separated from the Convent by the
Garden and Cemetery.  The Monks had been invited to assist at the
Pilgrimage.  They now arrived, marching two by two with lighted Torches
in their hands, and chaunting Hymns in honour of St. Clare.  Father
Pablos was at their head, the Abbot having excused himself from
attending.  The people made way for the holy Train, and the Friars
placed themselves in ranks on either side of the great Gates.  A few
minutes sufficed to arrange the order of the Procession.  This being
settled, the Convent doors were thrown open, and again the female
Chorus sounded in full melody.  First appeared a Band of Choristers:
As soon as they had passed, the Monks fell in two by two, and followed
with steps slow and measured.  Next came the Novices; They bore no
Tapers, as did the Professed, but moved on with eyes bent downwards,
and seemed to be occupied by telling their Beads.  To them succeeded a
young and lovely Girl, who represented St. Lucia:  She held a golden
bason in which were two eyes:  Her own were covered by a velvet
bandage, and She was conducted by another Nun habited as an Angel.  She
was followed by St. Catherine, a palm-branch in one hand, a flaming
Sword in the other:  She was robed in white, and her brow was
ornamented with a sparkling Diadem.  After her appeared St. Genevieve,
surrounded by a number of Imps, who putting themselves into grotesque
attitudes, drawing her by the robe, and sporting round her with antic
gestures, endeavoured to distract her attention from the Book, on which
her eyes were constantly fixed.  These merry Devils greatly entertained
the Spectators, who testified their pleasure by repeated bursts of
Laughter. The Prioress had been careful to select a Nun whose
disposition was naturally solemn and saturnine.  She had every reason
to be satisfied with her choice:  The drolleries of the Imps were
entirely thrown away, and St. Genevieve moved on without discomposing a
muscle.

Each of these Saints was separated from the Other by a band of
Choristers, exalting her praise in their Hymns, but declaring her to be
very much inferior to St. Clare, the Convent's avowed Patroness.  These
having passed, a long train of Nuns appeared, bearing like the
Choristers each a burning Taper.  Next came the reliques of St. Clare,
inclosed in vases equally precious for their materials and workmanship:
But they attracted not Lorenzo's attention.  The Nun who bore the heart
occupied him entirely.  According to Theodore's description, He doubted
not her being the Mother St. Ursula.  She seemed to look round with
anxiety.  As He stood foremost in the rank by which the procession
past, her eye caught Lorenzo's.  A flush of joy overspread her till
then pallid cheek.  She turned to her Companion eagerly.

'We are safe!' He heard her whisper; ''tis her Brother!'

His heart being now at ease, Lorenzo gazed with tranquillity upon the
remainder of the show.  Now appeared its most brilliant ornament.  It
was a Machine fashioned like a throne, rich with jewels and dazzling
with light.  It rolled onwards upon concealed wheels, and was guided by
several lovely Children, dressed as Seraphs.  The summit was covered
with silver clouds, upon which reclined the most beautiful form that
eyes ever witnessed. It was a Damsel representing St. Clare:  Her dress
was of inestimable price, and round her head a wreath of Diamonds
formed an artificial glory:  But all these ornaments yielded to the
lustre of her charms.  As She advanced, a murmur of delight ran through
the Crowd.  Even Lorenzo confessed secretly, that He never beheld more
perfect beauty, and had not his heart been Antonia's, it must have
fallen a sacrifice to this enchanting Girl.  As it was, He considered
her only as a fine Statue:  She obtained from him no tribute save cold
admiration, and when She had passed him, He thought of her no more.

'Who is She?' asked a By-stander in Lorenzo's hearing.

'One whose beauty you must often have heard celebrated. Her name is
Virginia de Villa-Franca:  She is a Pensioner of St. Clare's Convent, a
Relation of the Prioress, and has been selected with justice as the
ornament of the Procession.'

The Throne moved onwards.  It was followed by the Prioress herself:
She marched at the head of the remaining Nuns with a devout and
sanctified air, and closed the procession.  She moved on slowly:  Her
eyes were raised to heaven:  Her countenance calm and tranquil seemed
abstracted from all sublunary things, and no feature betrayed her
secret pride at displaying the pomp and opulence of her Convent.  She
passed along, accompanied by the prayers and benedictions of the
Populace:  But how great was the general confusion and surprize, when
Don Ramirez starting forward, challenged her as his Prisoner.

For a moment amazement held the Domina silent and immoveable: But no
sooner did She recover herself, than She exclaimed against sacrilege
and impiety, and called the People to rescue a Daughter of the Church.
They were eagerly preparing to obey her; when Don Ramirez, protected by
the Archers from their rage, commanded them to forbear, and threatened
them with the severest vengeance of the Inquisition.  At that dreaded
word every arm fell, every sword shrunk back into its scabbard.  The
Prioress herself turned pale, and trembled.  The general silence
convinced her that She had nothing to hope but from innocence, and She
besought Don Ramirez in a faultering voice, to inform her of what crime
She was accused.

'That you shall know in time,' replied He; 'But first I must secure the
Mother St. Ursula.'

'The Mother St. Ursula?' repeated the Domina faintly.

At this moment casting her eyes round, She saw near her Lorenzo and the
Duke, who had followed Don Ramirez.

'Ah! great God!' She cried, clasping her hands together with a frantic
air; 'I am betrayed!'

'Betrayed?' replied St. Ursula, who now arrived conducted by some of
the Archers, and followed by the Nun her Companion in the procession:
'Not betrayed, but discovered.  In me recognise your Accuser:  You know
not how well I am instructed in your guilt!--Segnor!' She continued,
turning to Don Ramirez; 'I commit myself to your custody.  I charge the
Prioress of St. Clare with murder, and stake my life for the justice of
my accusation.'

A general cry of surprize was uttered by the whole Audience, and an
explanation was demanded loudly.  The trembling Nuns, terrified at the
noise and universal confusion, had dispersed, and fled different ways.
Some regained the Convent; Others sought refuge in the dwellings of
their Relations; and Many, only sensible of their present danger, and
anxious to escape from the tumult, ran through the Streets, and
wandered, they knew not whither.  The lovely Virginia was one of the
first to fly:  And in order that She might be better seen and heard,
the People desired that St. Ursula should harangue them from the vacant
Throne.  The Nun complied; She ascended the glittering Machine, and
then addressed the surrounding multitude as follows.

'However strange and unseemly may appear my conduct, when considered to
be adopted by a Female and a Nun, necessity will justify it most fully.
A secret, an horrible secret weighs heavy upon my soul:  No rest can be
mine till I have revealed it to the world, and satisfied that innocent
blood which calls from the Grave for vengeance.  Much have I dared to
gain this opportunity of lightening my conscience.  Had I failed in my
attempt to reveal the crime, had the Domina but suspected that the
mystery was none to me, my ruin was inevitable.  Angels who watch
unceasingly over those who deserve their favour, have enabled me to
escape detection:  I am now at liberty to relate a Tale, whose
circumstances will freeze every honest soul with horror.  Mine is the
task to rend the veil from Hypocrisy, and show misguided Parents to
what dangers the Woman is exposed, who falls under the sway of a
monastic Tyrant.

'Among the Votaries of St. Clare, none was more lovely, none more
gentle, than Agnes de Medina.  I knew her well; She entrusted to me
every secret of her heart; I was her Friend and Confident, and I loved
her with sincere affection.  Nor was I singular in my attachment.   Her
piety unfeigned, her willingness to oblige, and her angelic
disposition, rendered her the Darling of all that was estimable in the
Convent.  The Prioress herself, proud, scrupulous and forbidding, could
not refuse Agnes that tribute of approbation which She bestowed upon no
one else.  Every one has some fault:  Alas! Agnes had her weakness!
She violated the laws of our order, and incurred the inveterate hate of
the unforgiving Domina.  St. Clare's rules are severe:  But grown
antiquated and neglected, many of late years have either been
forgotten, or changed by universal consent into milder punishments.
The penance, adjudged to the crime of Agnes, was most cruel, most
inhuman!  The law had been long exploded:  Alas!  It still existed, and
the revengeful Prioress now determined to revive it.

This law decreed that the Offender should be plunged into a private
dungeon, expressly constituted to hide from the world for ever the
Victim of Cruelty and tyrannic superstition.  In this dreadful abode
She was to lead a perpetual solitude, deprived of all society, and
believed to be dead by those whom affection might have prompted to
attempt her rescue.  Thus was She to languish out the remainder of her
days, with no other food than bread and water, and no other comfort
than the free indulgence of her tears.'

The indignation created by this account was so violent, as for some
moments to interrupt St. Ursula's narrative.  When the disturbance
ceased, and silence again prevailed through the Assembly, She continued
her discourse, while at every word the Domina's countenance betrayed
her increasing terrors.

'A Council of the twelve elder Nuns was called:  I was of the number.
The Prioress in exaggerated colours described the offence of Agnes, and
scrupled not to propose the revival of this almost forgotten law.  To
the shame of our sex be it spoken, that either so absolute was the
Domina's will in the Convent, or so much had disappointment, solitude,
and self-denial hardened their hearts and sowered their tempers that
this barbarous proposal was assented to by nine voices out of the
twelve.  I was not one of the nine.  Frequent opportunities had
convinced me of the virtues of Agnes, and I loved and pitied her most
sincerely.  The Mothers Bertha and Cornelia joined my party:  We made
the strongest opposition possible, and the Superior found herself
compelled to change her intention.  In spite of the majority in her
favour, She feared to break with us openly.  She knew that supported by
the Medina family, our forces would be too strong for her to cope with:
And She also knew that after being once imprisoned and supposed dead,
should Agnes be discovered, her ruin would be inevitable.  She
therefore gave up her design, though which much reluctance.  She
demanded some days to reflect upon a mode of punishment which might be
agreeable to the whole Community; and She promised, that as soon as her
resolution was fixed, the same Council should be again summoned.  Two
days passed away:  On the Evening of the Third it was announced that on
the next day Agnes should be examined; and that according to her
behaviour on that occasion, her punishment should be either
strengthened or mitigated.

'On the night preceding this examination, I stole to the Cell of Agnes
at an hour when I supposed the other Nuns to be buried in sleep.  I
comforted her to the best of my power:  I bad her take courage, told
her to rely upon the support of her friends, and taught her certain
signs, by which I might instruct her to answer the Domina's questions
by an assent or negative.  Conscious that her Enemy would strive to
confuse, embarrass, and daunt her, I feared her being ensnared into
some confession prejudicial to her interests.  Being anxious to keep my
visit secret, I stayed with Agnes but a short time.  I bad her not let
her spirits be cast down; I mingled my tears with those which streamed
down her cheek, embraced her fondly, and was on the point of retiring,
when I heard the sound of steps approaching the Cell.  I started back.
A Curtain which veiled a large Crucifix offered me a retreat, and I
hastened to place myself behind it.  The door opened.  The Prioress
entered, followed by four other Nuns.  They advanced towards the bed of
Agnes. The Superior reproached her with her errors in the bitterest
terms:  She told her that She was a disgrace to the Convent, that She
was resolved to deliver the world and herself from such a Monster, and
commanded her to drink the contents of a Goblet now presented to her by
one of the Nuns.  Aware of the fatal properties of the liquor, and
trembling to find herself upon the brink of Eternity, the unhappy Girl
strove to excite the Domina's pity by the most affecting prayers.

She sued for life in terms which might have melted the heart of a
Fiend:  She promised to submit patiently to any punishment, to shame,
imprisonment, and torture, might She but be permitted to live!  Oh!
might She but live another month, or week, or day! Her merciless Enemy
listened to her complaints unmoved:  She told her that at first She
meant to have spared her life, and that if She had altered her
intention, She had to thank the opposition of her Friends.  She
continued to insist upon her swallowing the poison:  She bad her
recommend herself to the Almighty's mercy, not to hers, and assured her
that in an hour She would be numbered with the Dead.  Perceiving that
it was vain to implore this unfeeling Woman, She attempted to spring
from her bed, and call for assistance:  She hoped, if She could not
escape the fate announced to her, at least to have witnesses of the
violence committed.  The Prioress guessed her design.  She seized her
forcibly by the arm, and pushed her back upon her pillow.  At the same
time drawing a dagger, and placing it at the breast of the unfortunate
Agnes, She protested that if She uttered a single cry, or hesitated a
single moment to drink the poison, She would pierce her heart that
instant.  Already half-dead with fear, She could make no further
resistance.  The Nun approached with the fatal Goblet.  The Domina
obliged her to take it, and swallow the contents.  She drank, and the
horrid deed was accomplished.  The Nuns then seated themselves round
the Bed.  They answered her groans with reproaches; They interrupted
with sarcasms the prayers in which She recommended her parting soul to
mercy:  They threatened her with heaven's vengeance and eternal
perdition: They bad her despair of pardon, and strowed with yet sharper
thorns Death's painful pillow.  Such were the sufferings of this young
Unfortunate, till released by fate from the malice of her Tormentors.
She expired in horror of the past, in fears for the future; and her
agonies were such as must have amply gratified the hate and vengeance
of her Enemies.  As soon as her Victim ceased to breathe, the Domina
retired, and was followed by her Accomplices.

'It was now that I ventured from my concealment.  I dared not to assist
my unhappy Friend, aware that without preserving her, I should only
have brought on myself the same destruction.  Shocked and terrified
beyond expression at this horrid scene, scarcely had I sufficient
strength to regain my Cell.  As I reached the door of that of Agnes, I
ventured to look towards the bed, on which lay her lifeless body, once
so lovely and so sweet!  I breathed a prayer for her departed Spirit,
and vowed to revenge her death by the shame and punishment of her
Assassins.  With danger and difficulty have I kept my oath.  I unwarily
dropped some words at the funeral of Agnes, while thrown off my guard
by excessive grief, which alarmed the guilty conscience of the
Prioress.  My every action was observed; My every step was traced.  I
was constantly surrounded by the Superior's spies.  It was long before
I could find the means of conveying to the unhappy Girl's Relations an
intimation of my secret.  It was given out that Agnes had expired
suddenly: This account was credited not only by her Friends in Madrid,
but even by those within the Convent.  The poison had left no marks
upon her body: No one suspected the true cause of her death, and it
remained unknown to all, save the Assassins and Myself.

'I have no more to say:  For what I have already said, I will answer
with my life.  I repeat that the Prioress is a Murderess; That She has
driven from the world, perhaps from heaven, an Unfortunate whose
offence was light and venial; that She has abused the power intrusted
to her hands, and has been a Tyrant, a Barbarian, and an Hypocrite.  I
also accuse the four Nuns, Violante, Camilla, Alix, and Mariana, as
being her Accomplices, and equally criminal.'

Here St. Ursula ended her narrative.  It created horror and surprize
throughout:  But when She related the inhuman murder of Agnes, the
indignation of the Mob was so audibly testified, that it was scarcely
possible to hear the conclusion.  This confusion increased with every
moment:  At length a multitude of voices exclaimed that the Prioress
should be given up to their fury. To this Don Ramirez refused to
consent positively.  Even Lorenzo bad the People remember that She had
undergone no trial, and advised them to leave her punishment to the
Inquisition.  All representations were fruitless:  The disturbance grew
still more violent, and the Populace more exasperated.  In vain did
Ramirez attempt to convey his Prisoner out of the Throng.  Wherever He
turned, a band of Rioters barred his passage, and demanded her being
delivered over to them more loudly than before. Ramirez ordered his
Attendants to cut their way through the multitude: Oppressed by
numbers, it was impossible for them to draw their swords.  He
threatened the Mob with the vengeance of the Inquisition:  But in this
moment of popular phrenzy even this dreadful name had lost its effect.
Though regret for his Sister made him look upon the Prioress with
abhorrence, Lorenzo could not help pitying a Woman in a situation so
terrible:  But in spite of all his exertions, and those of the Duke, of
Don Ramirez, and the Archers, the People continued to press onwards.
They forced a passage through the Guards who protected their destined
Victim, dragged her from her shelter, and proceeded to take upon her a
most summary and cruel vengeance.  Wild with terror, and scarcely
knowing what She said, the wretched Woman shrieked for a moment's
mercy:  She protested that She was innocent of the death of Agnes, and
could clear herself from the suspicion beyond the power of doubt.  The
Rioters heeded nothing but the gratification of their barbarous
vengeance.  They refused to listen to her:  They showed her every sort
of insult, loaded her with mud and filth, and called her by the most
opprobrious appellations. They tore her one from another, and each new
Tormentor was more savage than the former.  They stifled with howls and
execrations her shrill cries for mercy; and dragged her through the
Streets, spurning her, trampling her, and treating her with every
species of cruelty which hate or vindictive fury could invent.  At
length a Flint, aimed by some well-directing hand, struck her full upon
the temple.  She sank upon the ground bathed in blood, and in a few
minutes terminated her miserable existence. Yet though She no longer
felt their insults, the Rioters still exercised their impotent rage
upon her lifeless body.  They beat it, trod upon it, and ill-used it,
till it became no more than a mass of flesh, unsightly, shapeless, and
disgusting.

Unable to prevent this shocking event, Lorenzo and his Friends had
beheld it with the utmost horror:  But they were rouzed from their
compelled inactivity, on hearing that the Mob was attacking the Convent
of St. Clare.  The incensed Populace, confounding the innocent with the
guilty, had resolved to sacrifice all the Nuns of that order to their
rage, and not to leave one stone of the building upon another.  Alarmed
at this intelligence, they hastened to the Convent, resolved to defend
it if possible, or at least to rescue the Inhabitants from the fury of
the Rioters. Most of the Nuns had fled, but a few still remained in
their habitation.  Their situation was truly dangerous.  However, as
they had taken the precaution of fastening the inner Gates, with this
assistance Lorenzo hoped to repel the Mob, till Don Ramirez should
return to him with a more sufficient force.

Having been conducted by the former disturbance to the distance of some
Streets from the Convent, He did not immediately reach it:  When He
arrived, the throng surrounding it was so excessive as to prevent his
approaching the Gates.  In the interim, the Populace besieged the
Building with persevering rage:  They battered the walls, threw lighted
torches in at the windows, and swore that by break of day not a Nun of
St. Clare's order should be left alive.  Lorenzo had just succeeded in
piercing his way through the Crowd, when one of the Gates was forced
open.  The Rioters poured into the interior part of the Building, where
they exercised their vengeance upon every thing which found itself in
their passage.  They broke the furniture into pieces, tore down the
pictures, destroyed the reliques, and in their hatred of her Servant
forgot all respect to the Saint.  Some employed themselves in searching
out the Nuns, Others in pulling down parts of the Convent, and Others
again in setting fire to the pictures and valuable furniture which it
contained.  These Latter produced the most decisive desolation:  Indeed
the consequences of their action were more sudden than themselves had
expected or wished.  The Flames rising from the burning piles caught
part of the Building, which being old and dry, the conflagration spread
with rapidity from room to room. The Walls were soon shaken by the
devouring element: The Columns gave way: The Roofs came tumbling down
upon the Rioters, and crushed many of them beneath their weight.
Nothing was to be heard but shrieks and groans; The Convent was wrapped
in flames, and the whole presented a scene of devastation and horror.

Lorenzo was shocked at having been the cause, however innocent, of this
frightful disturbance:  He endeavoured to repair his fault by
protecting the helpless Inhabitants of the Convent.  He entered it with
the Mob, and exerted himself to repress the prevailing Fury, till the
sudden and alarming progress of the flames compelled him to provide for
his own safety.  The People now hurried out, as eagerly as they had
before thronged in; But their numbers clogging up the doorway, and the
fire gaining upon them rapidly, many of them perished ere they had time
to effect their escape.  Lorenzo's good fortune directed him to a small
door in a farther Aisle of the Chapel.  The bolt was already undrawn:
He opened the door, and found himself at the foot of St. Clare's
Sepulchre.

Here He stopped to breathe.  The Duke and some of his Attendants had
followed him, and thus were in security for the present. They now
consulted, what steps they should take to escape from this scene of
disturbance: But their deliberations were considerably interrupted by
the sight of volumes of fire rising from amidst the Convent's massy
walls, by the noise of some heavy Arch tumbling down in ruins, or by
the mingled shrieks of the Nuns and Rioters, either suffocating in the
press, perishing in the flames, or crushed beneath the weight of the
falling Mansion.

Lorenzo enquired, whither the Wicket led?  He was answered, to the
Garden of the Capuchins, and it was resolved to explore an outlet upon
that side.  Accordingly the Duke raised the Latch, and passed into the
adjoining Cemetery.  The Attendants followed without ceremony.
Lorenzo, being the last, was also on the point of quitting the
Colonnade, when He saw the door of the Sepulchre opened softly.
Someone looked out, but on perceiving Strangers uttered a loud shriek,
started back again, and flew down the marble Stairs.

'What can this mean?' cried Lorenzo; 'Here is some mystery concealed.
Follow me without delay!'

Thus saying, He hastened into the Sepulchre, and pursued the person who
continued to fly before him.  The Duke knew not the cause of his
exclamation, but supposing that He had good reasons for it, he followed
him without hesitation.  The Others did the same, and the whole Party
soon arrived at the foot of the Stairs.

The upper door having been left open, the neighbouring flames darted
from above a sufficient light to enable Lorenzo's catching a glance of
the Fugitive running through the long passages and distant Vaults:  But
when a sudden turn deprived him of this assistance, total darkness
succeeded, and He could only trace the object of his enquiry by the
faint echo of retiring feet.  The Pursuers were now compelled to
proceed with caution:  As well as they could judge, the Fugitive also
seemed to slacken pace, for they heard the steps follow each other at
longer intervals.  They at length were bewildered by the Labyrinth of
passages, and dispersed in various directions.  Carried away by his
eagerness to clear up this mystery, and to penetrate into which He was
impelled by a movement secret and unaccountable, Lorenzo heeded not
this circumstance till He found himself in total solitude. The noise of
footsteps had ceased.  All was silent around, and no clue offered
itself to guide him to the flying Person.  He stopped to reflect on the
means most likely to aid his pursuit. He was persuaded that no common
cause would have induced the Fugitive to seek that dreary place at an
hour so unusual:  The cry which He had heard, seemed uttered in a voice
of terror, and He was convinced that some mystery was attached to this
event. After some minutes past in hesitation He continued to proceed,
feeling his way along the walls of the passage.  He had already past
some time in this slow progress, when He descried a spark of light
glimmering at a distance.  Guided by this observation, and having drawn
his sword, He bent his steps towards the place, whence the beam seemed
to be emitted.

It proceeded from the Lamp which flamed before St. Clare's Statue.
Before it stood several Females, their white Garments streaming in the
blast, as it howled along the vaulted dungeons. Curious to know what
had brought them together in this melancholy spot, Lorenzo drew near
with precaution.  The Strangers seemed earnestly engaged in
conversation.  They heard not Lorenzo's steps, and He approached
unobserved, till He could hear their voices distinctly.

'I protest,' continued She who was speaking when He arrived, and to
whom the rest were listening with great attention; 'I protest, that I
saw them with my own eyes.  I flew down the steps; They pursued me, and
I escaped falling into their hands with difficulty.  Had it not been
for the Lamp, I should never have found you.'

'And what could bring them hither?' said another in a trembling voice;
'Do you think that they were looking for us?'

'God grant that my fears may be false,' rejoined the First; 'But I
doubt they are Murderers!  If they discover us, we are lost! As for me,
my fate is certain:  My affinity to the Prioress will be a sufficient
crime to condemn me; and though till now these Vaults have afforded me
a retreat.......'

Here looking up, her eye fell upon Lorenzo, who had continued to
approach softly.

'The Murderers!' She cried--

She started away from the Statue's Pedestal on which She had been
seated, and attempted to escape by flight.  Her Companions at the same
moment uttered a terrified scream, while Lorenzo arrested the Fugitive
by the arm.  Frightened and desperate She sank upon her knees before
him.

'Spare me!' She exclaimed; 'For Christ's sake, spare me!  I am
innocent, indeed, I am!'

While She spoke, her voice was almost choaked with fear.  The beams of
the Lamp darting full upon her face which was unveiled, Lorenzo
recognized the beautiful Virginia de Villa-Franca.  He hastened to
raise her from the ground, and besought her to take courage.  He
promised to protect her from the Rioters, assured her that her retreat
was still a secret, and that She might depend upon his readiness to
defend her to the last drop of his blood.  During this conversation,
the Nuns had thrown themselves into various attitudes:  One knelt, and
addressed herself to heaven; Another hid her face in the lap of her
Neighbour; Some listened motionless with fear to the discourse of the
supposed Assassin; while Others embraced the Statue of St. Clare, and
implored her protection with frantic cries.  On perceiving their
mistake, they crowded round Lorenzo and heaped benedictions on him by
dozens.  He found that, on hearing the threats of the Mob, and
terrified by the cruelties which from the Convent Towers they had seen
inflicted on the Superior, many of the Pensioners and Nuns had taken
refuge in the Sepulchre.  Among the former was to be reckoned the
lovely Virginia.  Nearly related to the Prioress, She had more reason
than the rest to dread the Rioters, and now besought Lorenzo earnestly
not to abandon her to their rage.  Her Companions, most of whom were
Women of noble family, made the same request, which He readily granted.
He promised not to quit them, till He had seen each of them safe in the
arms of her Relations:  But He advised their deferring to quit the
Sepulchre for some time longer, when the popular fury should be
somewhat calmed, and the arrival of military force have dispersed the
multitude.

'Would to God!' cried Virginia, 'That I were already safe in my
Mother's embraces!  How say you, Segnor; Will it be long, ere we may
leave this place?  Every moment that I pass here, I pass in torture!'

'I hope, not long,' said He; 'But till you can proceed with security,
this Sepulchre will prove an impenetrable asylum.  Here you run no
risque of a discovery, and I would advise your remaining quiet for the
next two or three hours.'

'Two or three hours?' exclaimed Sister Helena; 'If I stay another hour
in these vaults, I shall expire with fear!  Not the wealth of worlds
should bribe me to undergo again what I have suffered since my coming
hither. Blessed Virgin!  To be in this melancholy place in the middle
of night, surrounded by the mouldering bodies of my deceased
Companions, and expecting every moment to be torn in pieces by their
Ghosts who wander about me, and complain, and groan, and wail in
accents that make my blood run cold, ..... Christ Jesus!  It is
enough to drive me to madness!'

'Excuse me,' replied Lorenzo, 'if I am surprized that while menaced by
real woes you are capable of yielding to imaginary dangers.  These
terrors are puerile and groundless:  Combat them, holy Sister; I have
promised to guard you from the Rioters, but against the attacks of
superstition you must depend for protection upon yourself. The idea of
Ghosts is ridiculous in the extreme; And if you continue to be swayed
by ideal terrors ...'

'Ideal?' exclaimed the Nuns with one voice; 'Why we heard it ourselves,
Segnor!  Every one of us heard it!  It was frequently repeated, and it
sounded every time more melancholy and deep. You will never persuade me
that we could all have been deceived. Not we, indeed; No, no; Had the
noise been merely created by fancy ....'

'Hark!  Hark!' interrupted Virginia in a voice of terror; 'God preserve
us!  There it is again!'

The Nuns clasped their hands together, and sank upon their knees.

Lorenzo looked round him eagerly, and was on the point of yielding to
the fears which already had possessed the Women. Universal silence
prevailed.  He examined the Vault, but nothing was to be seen.  He now
prepared to address the Nuns, and ridicule their childish
apprehensions, when his attention was arrested by a deep and long-drawn
groan.

'What was that?' He cried, and started.

'There, Segnor!' said Helena; 'Now you must be convinced!  You have
heard the noise yourself!  Now judge, whether our terrors are
imaginary.  Since we have been here, that groaning has been repeated
almost every five minutes.  Doubtless, it proceeds from some Soul in
pain, who wishes to be prayed out of purgatory:  But none of us here
dares ask it the question.  As for me, were I to see an Apparition, the
fright, I am very certain, would kill me out of hand.'

As She said this, a second groan was heard yet more distinctly. The
Nuns crossed themselves, and hastened to repeat their prayers against
evil Spirits.  Lorenzo listened attentively.  He even thought that He
could distinguish sounds, as of one speaking in complaint; But distance
rendered them inarticulate.  The noise seemed to come from the midst of
the small Vault in which He and the Nuns then were, and which a
multitude of passages branching out in various directions, formed into
a sort of Star.  Lorenzo's curiosity which was ever awake, made him
anxious to solve this mystery.  He desired that silence might be kept.
The Nuns obeyed him.  All was hushed, till the general stillness was
again disturbed by the groaning, which was repeated several times
successively.  He perceived it to be most audible, when upon following
the sound He was conducted close to the shrine of St. Clare:

'The noise comes from hence,' said He; 'Whose is this Statue?'

Helena, to whom He addressed the question, paused for a moment.
Suddenly She clapped her hands together.

'Aye!' cried She, 'it must be so.  I have discovered the meaning of
these groans.'

The Nuns crowded round her, and besought her eagerly to explain
herself.  She gravely replied that for time immemorial the Statue had
been famous for performing miracles:  From this She inferred that the
Saint was concerned at the conflagration of a Convent which She
protected, and expressed her grief by audible lamentations. Not having
equal faith in the miraculous Saint, Lorenzo did not think this
solution of the mystery quite so satisfactory, as the Nuns, who
subscribed to it without hesitation.  In one point, 'tis true, that He
agreed with Helena.

He suspected that the groans proceeded from the Statue:  The more He
listened, the more was He confirmed in this idea.  He drew nearer to
the Image, designing to inspect it more closely:  But perceiving his
intention, the Nuns besought him for God's sake to desist, since if He
touched the Statue, his death was inevitable.

'And in what consists the danger?' said He.

'Mother of God!  In what?' replied Helena, ever eager to relate a
miraculous adventure; 'If you had only heard the hundredth part of
those marvellous Stories about this Statue which the Domina used to
recount!  She assured us often and often, that if we only dared to lay
a finger upon it, we might expect the most fatal consequences. Among
other things She told us that a Robber having entered these Vaults by
night, He observed yonder Ruby, whose value is inestimable.  Do you see
it, Segnor?  It sparkles upon the third finger of the hand, in which
She holds a crown of Thorns.  This Jewel naturally excited the
Villain's cupidity.  He resolved to make himself Master of it.  For
this purpose He ascended the Pedestal:  He supported himself by
grasping the Saint's right arm, and extended his own towards the Ring.
What was his surprize, when He saw the Statue's hand raised in a
posture of menace, and heard her lips pronounce his eternal perdition!
Penetrated with awe and consternation, He desisted from his attempt,
and prepared to quit the Sepulchre.  In this He also failed.  Flight
was denied him.  He found it impossible to disengage the hand, which
rested upon the right arm of the Statue.  In vain did He struggle:  He
remained fixed to the Image, till the insupportable and fiery anguish
which darted itself through his veins, compelled his shrieking for
assistance.

The Sepulchre was now filled with Spectators.  The Villain confessed
his sacrilege, and was only released by the separation of his hand from
his body.  It has remained ever since fastened to the Image.  The
Robber turned Hermit, and led ever after an exemplary life:  But yet
the Saint's decree was performed, and Tradition says that He continues
to haunt this Sepulchre, and implore St. Clare's pardon with groans and
lamentations.  Now I think of it, those which we have just heard, may
very possibly have been uttered by the Ghost of this Sinner: But of
this I will not be positive.  All that I can say is, that since that
time no one has ever dared to touch the Statue:  Then do not be
foolhardy, good Segnor!  For the love of heaven, give up your design,
nor expose yourself unnecessarily to certain destruction.'

Not being convinced that his destruction would be so certain as Helena
seemed to think it, Lorenzo persisted in his resolution. The Nuns
besought him to desist in piteous terms, and even pointed out the
Robber's hand, which in effect was still visible upon the arm of the
Statue.  This proof, as they imagined, must convince him. It was very
far from doing so; and they were greatly scandalized when he declared
his suspicion that the dried and shrivelled fingers had been placed
there by order of the Prioress.  In spite of their prayers and threats
He approached the Statue.  He sprang over the iron Rails which defended
it, and the Saint underwent a thorough examination. The Image at first
appeared to be of Stone, but proved on further inspection to be formed
of no more solid materials than coloured Wood.  He shook it, and
attempted to move it; But it appeared to be of a piece with the Base
which it stood upon.  He examined it over and over:  Still no clue
guided him to the solution of this mystery, for which the Nuns were
become equally solicitous, when they saw that He touched the Statue
with impunity.  He paused, and listened:  The groans were repeated at
intervals, and He was convinced of being in the spot nearest to them.
He mused upon this singular event, and ran over the Statue with
enquiring eyes. Suddenly they rested upon the shrivelled hand.  It
struck him, that so particular an injunction was not given without
cause, not to touch the arm of the Image.  He again ascended the
Pedestal; He examined the object of his attention, and discovered a
small knob of iron concealed between the Saint's shoulder and what was
supposed to have been the hand of the Robber.  This observation
delighted him.  He applied his fingers to the knob, and pressed it down
forcibly.  Immediately a rumbling noise was heard within the Statue, as
if a chain tightly stretched was flying back. Startled at the sound the
timid Nuns started away, prepared to hasten from the Vault at the first
appearance of danger.  All remaining quiet and still, they again
gathered round Lorenzo, and beheld his proceedings with anxious
curiosity.

Finding that nothing followed this discovery, He descended.  As He took
his hand from the Saint, She trembled beneath his touch. This created
new terrors in the Spectators, who believed the Statue to be animated.
Lorenzo's ideas upon the subject were widely different. He easily
comprehended that the noise which He had heard, was occasioned by his
having loosened a chain which attached the Image to its Pedestal.  He
once more attempted to move it, and succeeded without much exertion.
He placed it upon the ground, and then perceived the Pedestal to be
hollow, and covered at the opening with an heavy iron grate.

This excited such general curiosity that the Sisters forgot both their
real and imaginary dangers.  Lorenzo proceeded to raise the Grate, in
which the Nuns assisted him to the utmost of their strength.  The
attempt was accomplished with little difficulty. A deep abyss now
presented itself before them, whose thick obscurity the eye strove in
vain to pierce.  The rays of the Lamp were too feeble to be of much
assistance.  Nothing was discernible, save a flight of rough unshapen
steps which sank into the yawning Gulph and were soon lost in darkness.
The groans were heard no more; But All believed them to have ascended
from this Cavern.  As He bent over it, Lorenzo fancied that He
distinguished something bright twinkling through the gloom.  He gazed
attentively upon the spot where it showed itself, and was convinced
that He saw a small spark of light, now visible, now disappearing.  He
communicated this circumstance to the Nuns: They also perceived the
spark; But when He declared his intention to descend into the Cave,
they united to oppose his resolution. All their remonstrances could not
prevail on him to alter it. None of them had courage enough to
accompany him; neither could He think of depriving them of the Lamp.
Alone therefore, and in darkness, He prepared to pursue his design,
while the Nuns were contented to offer up prayers for his success and
safety.

The steps were so narrow and uneven, that to descend them was like
walking down the side of a precipice.  The obscurity by which He was
surrounded rendered his footing insecure.  He was obliged to proceed
with great caution, lest He should miss the steps and fall into the
Gulph below him.  This He was several times on the point of doing.
However, He arrived sooner upon solid ground than He had expected:  He
now found that the thick darkness and impenetrable mists which reigned
through the Cavern had deceived him into the belief of its being much
more profound than it proved upon inspection.  He reached the foot of
the Stairs unhurt:  He now stopped, and looked round for the spark
which had before caught his attention.  He sought it in vain: All was
dark and gloomy.  He listened for the groans; But his ear caught no
sound, except the distant murmur of the Nuns above, as in low voices
they repeated their Ave-Marias.  He stood irresolute to which side He
should address his steps.  At all events He determined to proceed:  He
did so, but slowly, fearing lest instead of approaching, He should be
retiring from the object of his search.  The groans seemed to announce
one in pain, or at least in sorrow, and He hoped to have the power of
relieving the Mourner's calamities.  A plaintive tone, sounding at no
great distance, at length reached his hearing; He bent his course
joyfully towards it.  It became more audible as He advanced; and He
soon beheld again the spark of light, which a low projecting Wall had
hitherto concealed from him.

It proceeded from a small Lamp which was placed upon an heap of stones,
and whose faint and melancholy rays served rather to point out, than
dispell the horrors of a narrow gloomy dungeon formed in one side of
the Cavern; It also showed several other recesses of similar
construction, but whose depth was buried in obscurity.  Coldly played
the light upon the damp walls, whose dew-stained surface gave back a
feeble reflection.  A thick and pestilential fog clouded the height of
the vaulted dungeon.  As Lorenzo advanced, He felt a piercing chillness
spread itself through his veins.  The frequent groans still engaged him
to move forwards.  He turned towards them, and by the Lamp's glimmering
beams beheld in a corner of this loathsome abode, a Creature stretched
upon a bed of straw, so wretched, so emaciated, so pale, that He
doubted to think her Woman.  She was half-naked: Her long dishevelled
hair fell in disorder over her face, and almost entirely concealed it.
One wasted Arm hung listlessly upon a tattered rug which covered her
convulsed and shivering limbs:  The Other was wrapped round a small
bundle, and held it closely to her bosom.  A large Rosary lay near her:
Opposite to her was a Crucifix, on which She bent her sunk eyes
fixedly, and by her side stood a Basket and a small Earthen Pitcher.

Lorenzo stopped:  He was petrified with horror.  He gazed upon the
miserable Object with disgust and pity.  He trembled at the spectacle;
He grew sick at heart: His strength failed him, and his limbs were
unable to support his weight.  He was obliged to lean against the low
Wall which was near him, unable to go forward, or to address the
Sufferer.  She cast her eyes towards the Staircase:  The Wall concealed
Lorenzo, and She observed him not.

'No one comes!' She at length murmured.

As She spoke, her voice was hollow, and rattled in her throat: She
sighed bitterly.

'No one comes!' She repeated; 'No!  They have forgotten me!  They will
come no more!'

She paused for a moment:  Then continued mournfully.

'Two days!  Two long, long days, and yet no food!  And yet no hope, no
comfort!  Foolish Woman!  How can I wish to lengthen a life so
wretched!  Yet such a death!  O! God!  To perish by such a death!  To
linger out such ages in torture!  Till now, I knew not what it was to
hunger!  Hark!  No.  No one comes!  They will come no more!'

She was silent.  She shivered, and drew the rug over her naked
shoulders.

'I am very cold!  I am still unused to the damps of this dungeon!

'Tis strange:  But no matter.  Colder shall I soon be, and yet not feel
it--I shall be cold, cold as Thou art!'

She looked at the bundle which lay upon her breast. She bent over it,
and kissed it:  Then drew back hastily, and shuddered with disgust.

'It was once so sweet!  It would have been so lovely, so like him!  I
have lost it for ever!  How a few days have changed it! I should not
know it again myself!  Yet it is dear to me!  God! how dear!  I will
forget what it is: I will only remember what it was, and love it as
well, as when it was so sweet! so lovely! so like him!  I thought that
I had wept away all my tears, but here is one still lingering.'

She wiped her eyes with a tress of her hair.  She put out her hand for
the Pitcher, and reached it with difficulty.  She cast into it a look
of hopeless enquiry.  She sighed, and replaced it upon the ground.

'Quite a void!  Not a drop!  Not one drop left to cool my scorched-up
burning palate!  Now would I give treasures for a draught of water!
And they are God's Servants, who make me suffer thus!  They think
themselves holy, while they torture me like Fiends!  They are cruel and
unfeeling; And 'tis they who bid me repent; And 'tis they, who threaten
me with eternal perdition! Saviour, Saviour! You think not so!'

She again fixed her eyes upon the Crucifix, took her Rosary, and while
She told her beads, the quick motion of her lips declared her to be
praying with fervency.

While He listened to her melancholy accents, Lorenzo's sensibility
became yet more violently affected.  The first sight of such misery had
given a sensible shock to his feelings:  But that being past, He now
advanced towards the Captive.  She heard his steps, and uttering a cry
of joy, dropped the Rosary.

'Hark!  Hark!  Hark!' She cried:  'Some one comes!'

She strove to raise herself, but her strength was unequal to the
attempt:  She fell back, and as She sank again upon the bed of straw,
Lorenzo heard the rattling of heavy chains.  He still approached, while
the Prisoner thus continued.

'Is it you, Camilla?  You are come then at last?  Oh! it was time!  I
thought that you had forsaken me; that I was doomed to perish of
hunger.  Give me to drink, Camilla, for pity's sake!  I am faint with
long fasting, and grown so weak that I cannot raise myself from the
ground.  Good Camilla, give me to drink, lest I expire before you!'

Fearing that surprize in her enfeebled state might be fatal, Lorenzo
was at a loss how to address her.

'It is not Camilla,' said He at length, speaking in a slow and gentle
voice.

'Who is it then?' replied the Sufferer:  'Alix, perhaps, or Violante.
My eyes are grown so dim and feeble that I cannot distinguish your
features.  But whichever it is, if your breast is sensible of the least
compassion, if you are not more cruel than Wolves and Tigers, take pity
on my sufferings.  You know that I am dying for want of sustenance.
This is the third day, since these lips have received nourishment.  Do
you bring me food?  Or come you only to announce my death, and learn
how long I have yet to exist in agony?'

'You mistake my business,' replied Lorenzo; 'I am no Emissary of the
cruel Prioress.  I pity your sorrows, and come hither to relieve them.'

'To relieve them?' repeated the Captive; 'Said you, to relieve them?'

At the same time starting from the ground, and supporting herself upon
her hands, She gazed upon the Stranger earnestly.

'Great God!  It is no illusion!  A Man!  Speak!  Who are you? What
brings you hither?  Come you to save me, to restore me to liberty, to
life and light?  Oh! speak, speak quickly, lest I encourage an hope
whose disappointment will destroy me.'

'Be calm!' replied Lorenzo in a voice soothing and compassionate; 'The
Domina of whose cruelty you complain, has already paid the forfeit of
her offences:  You have nothing more to fear from her.

A few minutes will restore you to liberty, and the embraces of your
Friends from whom you have been secluded.  You may rely upon my
protection.  Give me your hand, and be not fearful. Let me conduct you
where you may receive those attentions which your feeble state
requires.'

'Oh!  Yes!  Yes!  Yes!' cried the Prisoner with an exulting shriek;
'There is a God then, and a just one! Joy!  Joy!  I shall once more
breath the fresh air, and view the light of the glorious sunbeams! I
will go with you! Stranger, I will go with you!  Oh!  Heaven will bless
you for pitying an Unfortunate!  But this too must go with me,' She
added pointing to the small bundle which She still clasped to her
bosom; 'I cannot part with this.  I will bear it away:  It shall
convince the world how dreadful are the abodes so falsely termed
religious.  Good Stranger, lend me your hand to rise:  I am faint with
want, and sorrow, and sickness, and my forces have quite forsaken me!
So, that is well!'

As Lorenzo stooped to raise her, the beams of the Lamp struck full upon
his face.

'Almighty God!' She exclaimed; 'Is it possible!  That look! Those
features!  Oh!  Yes, it is, it is .....'

She extended her arms to throw them round him; But her enfeebled frame
was unable to sustain the emotions which agitated her bosom.  She
fainted, and again sank upon the bed of straw.

Lorenzo was surprized at her last exclamation.  He thought that He had
before heard such accents as her hollow voice had just formed, but
where He could not remember.  He saw that in her dangerous situation
immediate physical aid was absolutely necessary, and He hastened to
convey her from the dungeon.  He was at first prevented from doing so
by a strong chain fastened round the prisoner's body, and fixing her to
the neighbouring Wall.  However, his natural strength being aided by
anxiety to relieve the Unfortunate, He soon forced out the Staple to
which one end of the Chain was attached. Then taking the Captive in his
arms, He bent his course towards the Staircase.  The rays of the Lamp
above, as well as the murmur of female voices, guided his steps. He
gained the Stairs, and in a few minutes after arrived at the iron-grate.

The Nuns during his absence had been terribly tormented by curiosity
and apprehension:  They were equally surprized and delighted on seeing
him suddenly emerge from the Cave.  Every heart was filled with
compassion for the miserable Creature whom He bore in his arms.  While
the Nuns, and Virginia in particular, employed themselves in striving
to recall her to her senses, Lorenzo related in few words the manner of
his finding her.  He then observed to them that by this time the tumult
must have been quelled, and that He could now conduct them to their
Friends without danger.  All were eager to quit the Sepulchre:  Still
to prevent all possibility of ill-usage, they besought Lorenzo to
venture out first alone, and examine whether the Coast was clear. With
this request He complied.  Helena offered to conduct him to the
Staircase, and they were on the point of departing, when a strong light
flashed from several passages upon the adjacent walls.  At the same
time Steps were heard of people approaching hastily, and whose number
seemed to be considerable. The Nuns were greatly alarmed at this
circumstance:  They supposed their retreat to be discovered, and the
Rioters to be advancing in pursuit of them.  Hastily quitting the
Prisoner who remained insensible, they crowded round Lorenzo, and
claimed his promise to protect them.  Virginia alone forgot her own
danger by striving to relieve the sorrows of Another.  She supported
the Sufferer's head upon her knees, bathing her temples with
rose-water, chafing her cold hands, and sprinkling her face with tears
which were drawn from her by compassion.  The Strangers approaching
nearer, Lorenzo was enabled to dispel the fears of the Suppliants.  His
name, pronounced by a number of voices among which He distinguished the
Duke's, pealed along the Vaults, and convinced him that He was the
object of their search.  He communicated this intelligence to the Nuns,
who received it with rapture.  A few moments after confirmed his idea.
Don Ramirez, as well as the Duke, appeared, followed by Attendants with
Torches.  They had been seeking him through the Vaults, in order to let
him know that the Mob was dispersed, and the riot entirely over.
Lorenzo recounted briefly his adventure in the Cavern, and explained
how much the Unknown was in want of medical assistance.  He besought
the Duke to take charge of her, as well as of the Nuns and Pensioners.

'As for me,' said He, 'Other cares demand my attention.  While you with
one half of the Archers convey these Ladies to their respective homes,
I wish the other half to be left with me.  I will examine the Cavern
below, and pervade the most secret recesses of the Sepulchre.  I cannot
rest till convinced that yonder wretched Victim was the only one
confined by Superstition in these vaults.'

The Duke applauded his intention.  Don Ramirez offered to assist him in
his enquiry, and his proposal was accepted with gratitude.

The Nuns having made their acknowledgments to Lorenzo, committed
themselves to the care of his Uncle, and were conducted from the
Sepulchre.  Virginia requested that the Unknown might be given to her
in charge, and promised to let Lorenzo know whenever She was
sufficiently recovered to accept his visits.  In truth, She made this
promise more from consideration for herself than for either Lorenzo or
the Captive.  She had witnessed his politeness, gentleness, and
intrepidity with sensible emotion.  She wished earnestly to preserve
his acquaintance; and in addition to the sentiments of pity which the
Prisoner excited, She hoped that her attention to this Unfortunate
would raise her a degree in the esteem of Lorenzo.  She had no occasion
to trouble herself upon this head.  The kindness already displayed by
her and the tender concern which She had shown for the Sufferer had
gained her an exalted place in his good graces.  While occupied in
alleviating the Captive's sorrows, the nature of her employment adorned
her with new charms, and rendered her beauty a thousand times more
interesting.  Lorenzo viewed her with admiration and delight:  He
considered her as a ministering Angel descended to the aid of afflicted
innocence; nor could his heart have resisted her attractions, had it
not been steeled by the remembrance of Antonia.

The Duke now conveyed the Nuns in safety to the Dwellings of their
respective Friends.  The rescued Prisoner was still insensible and gave
no signs of life, except by occasional groans.  She was borne upon a
sort of litter; Virginia, who was constantly by the side of it, was
apprehensive that exhausted by long abstinence, and shaken by the
sudden change from bonds and darkness to liberty and light, her frame
would never get the better of the shock.  Lorenzo and Don Ramirez still
remained in the Sepulchre.  After deliberating upon their proceedings,
it was resolved that to prevent losing time, the Archers should be
divided into two Bodies:  That with one Don Ramirez should examine the
cavern, while Lorenzo with the other might penetrate into the further
Vaults.  This being arranged, and his Followers being provided with
Torches, Don Ramirez advanced to the Cavern. He had already descended
some steps when He heard People approaching hastily from the interior
part of the Sepulchre. This surprized him, and He quitted the Cave
precipitately.

'Do you hear footsteps?' said Lorenzo; 'Let us bend our course towards
them.  'Tis from this side that they seem to proceed.'

At that moment a loud and piercing shriek induced him to quicken his
steps.

'Help!  Help, for God's sake!  cried a voice, whose melodious tone
penetrated Lorenzo's heart with terror.

He flew towards the cry with the rapidity of lightning, and was
followed by Don Ramirez with equal swiftness.