The crickets sing, and Man's o'er-laboured sense
  Repairs itself by rest:  Our Tarquin thus
  Did softly press the rushes, ere He wakened
  The chastity He wounded--Cytherea,
  How bravely thou becom'st thy bed! Fresh Lily!
  And whiter than the sheets!
                      Cymbeline.

All the researches of the Marquis de las Cisternas proved vain: Agnes
was lost to him for ever.  Despair produced so violent an effect upon
his constitution, that the consequence was a long and severe illness.
This prevented him from visiting Elvira as He had intended; and She
being ignorant of the cause of his neglect, it gave her no trifling
uneasiness.  His Sister's death had prevented Lorenzo from
communicating to his Uncle his designs respecting Antonia:  The
injunctions of her Mother forbad his presenting himself to her without
the Duke's consent; and as She heard no more of him or his proposals,
Elvira conjectured that He had either met with a better match, or had
been commanded to give up all thoughts of her Daughter.  Every day made
her more uneasy respecting Antonia's fate:  While She retained the
Abbot's protection, She bore with fortitude the disappointment of her
hopes with regard to Lorenzo and the Marquis.  That resource now failed
her.  She was convinced that Ambrosio had meditated her Daughter's
ruin:  And when She reflected that her death would leave Antonia
friendless and unprotected in a world so base, so perfidious and
depraved, her heart swelled with the bitterness of apprehension.  At
such times She would sit for hours gazing upon the lovely Girl; and
seeming to listen to her innocent prattle, while in reality her
thoughts dwelt upon the sorrows into which a moment would suffice to
plunge her.  Then She would clasp her in her arms suddenly, lean her
head upon her Daughter's bosom, and bedew it with her tears.

An event was in preparation which, had She known it, would have
relieved her from her inquietude.  Lorenzo now waited only for a
favourable opportunity to inform the Duke of his intended marriage:
However, a circumstance which occurred at this period, obliged him to
delay his explanation for a few days longer.

Don Raymond's malady seemed to gain ground.  Lorenzo was constantly at
his bedside, and treated him with a tenderness truly fraternal.  Both
the cause and effects of the disorder were highly afflicting to the
Brother of Agnes: yet Theodore's grief was scarcely less sincere.  That
amiable Boy quitted not his Master for a moment, and put every means in
practice to console and alleviate his sufferings.  The Marquis had
conceived so rooted an affection for his deceased Mistress, that it was
evident to all that He never could survive her loss:  Nothing could
have prevented him from sinking under his grief but the persuasion of
her being still alive, and in need of his assistance.  Though convinced
of its falsehood, his Attendants encouraged him in a belief which
formed his only comfort.  He was assured daily that fresh perquisitions
were making respecting the fate of Agnes:  Stories were invented
recounting the various attempts made to get admittance into the
Convent; and circumstances were related which, though they did not
promise her absolute recovery, at least were sufficient to keep his
hopes alive.  The Marquis constantly fell into the most terrible excess
of passion when informed of the failure of these supposed attempts.
Still He would not credit that the succeeding ones would have the same
fate, but flattered himself that the next would prove more fortunate.

Theodore was the only one who exerted himself to realize his Master's
Chimoeras.  He was eternally busied in planning schemes for entering
the Convent, or at least of obtaining from the Nuns some intelligence
of Agnes.  To execute these schemes was the only inducement which could
prevail on him to quit Don Raymond. He became a very Proteus, changing
his shape every day; but all his metamorphoses were to very little
purpose: He regularly returned to the Palace de las Cisternas without
any intelligence to confirm his Master's hopes.  One day He took it
into his head to disguise himself as a Beggar.  He put a patch over his
left eye, took his Guitar in hand, and posted himself at the Gate of
the Convent.

'If Agnes is really confined in the Convent,' thought He, 'and hears my
voice, She will recollect it, and possibly may find means to let me
know that She is here.'

With this idea He mingled with a crowd of Beggars who assembled daily
at the Gate of St. Clare to receive Soup, which the Nuns were
accustomed to distribute at twelve o'clock.  All were provided with
jugs or bowls to carry it away; But as Theodore had no utensil of this
kind, He begged leave to eat his portion at the Convent door.  This was
granted without difficulty:  His sweet voice, and in spite of his
patched eye, his engaging countenance, won the heart of the good old
Porteress, who, aided by a Lay-Sister, was busied in serving to each
his Mess. Theodore was bad to stay till the Others should depart, and
promised that his request should then be granted.  The Youth desired no
better, since it was not to eat Soup that He presented himself at the
Convent.  He thanked the Porteress for her permission, retired from the
Door, and seating himself upon a large stone, amused himself in tuning
his Guitar while the Beggars were served.

As soon as the Crowd was gone, Theodore was beckoned to the Gate, and
desired to come in.  He obeyed with infinite readiness, but affected
great respect at passing the hallowed Threshold, and to be much daunted
by the presence of the Reverend Ladies.  His feigned timidity flattered
the vanity of the Nuns, who endeavoured to reassure him.  The Porteress
took him into her awn little Parlour:  In the meanwhile, the Lay-Sister
went to the Kitchen, and soon returned with a double portion of Soup,
of better quality than what was given to the Beggars.  His Hostess
added some fruits and confections from her own private store, and Both
encouraged the Youth to dine heartily.  To all these attentions He
replied with much seeming gratitude, and abundance of blessings upon
his benefactresses.  While He ate, the Nuns admired the delicacy of his
features, the beauty of his hair, and the sweetness and grace which
accompanied all his actions.  They lamented to each other in whispers,
that so charming a Youth should be exposed to the seductions of the
World, and agreed, that He would be a worthy Pillar of the Catholic
Church.  They concluded their conference by resolving that Heaven would
be rendered a real service if they entreated the Prioress to intercede
with Ambrosio for the Beggar's admission into the order of Capuchins.

This being determined, the Porteress, who was a person of great
influence in the Convent, posted away in all haste to the Domina's
Cell.  Here She made so flaming a narrative of Theodore's merits that
the old Lady grew curious to see him. Accordingly, the Porteress was
commissioned to convey him to the Parlour grate.  In the interim, the
supposed Beggar was sifting the Lay-Sister with respect to the fate of
Agnes:  Her evidence only corroborated the Domina's assertions.  She
said that Agnes had been taken ill on returning from confession, had
never quitted her bed from that moment, and that She had herself been
present at the Funeral.  She even attested having seen her dead body,
and assisted with her own hands in adjusting it upon the Bier.  This
account discouraged Theodore:  Yet as He had pushed the adventure so
far, He resolved to witness its conclusion.

The Porteress now returned, and ordered him to follow her.  He obeyed,
and was conducted into the Parlour, where the Lady Prioress was already
posted at the Grate.  The Nuns surrounded her, who all flocked with
eagerness to a scene which promised some diversion.  Theodore saluted
them with profound respect, and his presence had the power to smooth
for a moment even the stern brow of the Superior.  She asked several
questions respecting his Parents, his religion, and what had reduced
him to a state of Beggary.  To these demands his answers were perfectly
satisfactory and perfectly false. He was then asked his opinion of a
monastic life:  He replied in terms of high estimation and respect for
it.  Upon this, the Prioress told him that his obtaining an entrance
into a religious order was not impossible; that her recommendation
would not permit his poverty to be an obstacle, and that if She found
him deserving it, He might depend in future upon her protection.
Theodore assured her that to merit her favour would be his highest
ambition; and having ordered him to return next day, when She would
talk with him further, the Domina quitted the Parlour.

The Nuns, whom respect for the Superior had till then kept silent, now
crowded all together to the Grate, and assailed the Youth with a
multitude of questions.  He had already examined each with attention:
Alas! Agnes was not amongst them.  The Nuns heaped question upon
question so thickly that it was scarcely possible for him to reply.
One asked where He was born, since his accent declared him to be a
Foreigner:  Another wanted to know, why He wore a patch upon his left
eye:  Sister Helena enquired whether He had not a Sister like him,
because She should like such a Companion; and Sister Rachael was fully
persuaded that the Brother would be the pleasanter Companion of the
Two. Theodore amused himself with retailing to the credulous Nuns for
truths all the strange stories which his imagination could invent.  He
related to them his supposed adventures, and penetrated every Auditor
with astonishment, while He talked of Giants, Savages, Ship-wrecks, and
Islands inhabited

      'By Anthropophagi, and Men whose heads
      Do grow beneath their shoulders,'

With many other circumstances to the full as remarkable. He said, that
He was born in Terra Incognita, was educated at an Hottentot
University, and had past two years among the Americans of Silesia.

'For what regards the loss of my eye' said He, 'it was a just
punishment upon me for disrespect to the Virgin, when I made my second
pilgrimage to Loretto.  I stood near the Altar in the miraculous
Chapel:  The Monks were proceeding to array the Statue in her best
apparel.  The Pilgrims were ordered to close their eyes during this
ceremony:  But though by nature extremely religious, curiosity was too
powerful.  At the moment ..... I shall penetrate you with horror,
reverend Ladies, when I reveal my crime! ....  At the moment that
the Monks were changing her shift, I ventured to open my left eye, and
gave a little peep towards the Statue.  That look was my last!  The
Glory which surrounded the Virgin was too great to be supported.  I
hastily shut my sacrilegious eye, and never have been able to unclose
it since!'

At the relation of this miracle the Nuns all crossed themselves, and
promised to intercede with the blessed Virgin for the recovery of his
sight.  They expressed their wonder at the extent of his travels, and
at the strange adventures which He had met with at so early an age.
They now remarked his Guitar, and enquired whether he was an adept in
Music.  He replied with modesty that it was not for him to decide upon
his talents, but requested permission to appeal to them as Judges.
This was granted without difficulty.

'But at least,' said the old Porteress, 'take care not to sing any
thing profane.'

'You may depend upon my discretion,' replied Theodore: 'You shall hear
how dangerous it is for young Women to abandon themselves to their
passions, illustrated by the adventure of a Damsel who fell suddenly in
love with an unknown Knight.'

'But is the adventure true?' enquired the Porteress.

'Every word of it.  It happened in Denmark, and the Heroine was thought
so beautiful that She was known by no other name but that of "the
lovely Maid".'

'In Denmark, say you?' mumbled an old Nun; 'Are not the People all
Blacks in Denmark?'

'By no means, reverend Lady; They are of a delicate pea-green with
flame-coloured hair and whiskers.'

'Mother of God!  Pea-green?' exclaimed Sister Helena; 'Oh! 'tis
impossible!'

'Impossible?' said the Porteress with a look of contempt and
exultation:  'Not at all:  When I was a young Woman, I remember seeing
several of them myself.'

Theodore now put his instrument in proper order.  He had read the story
of a King of England whose prison was discovered by a Minstrel; and He
hoped that the same scheme would enable him to discover Agnes, should
She be in the Convent.  He chose a Ballad which She had taught him
herself in the Castle of Lindenberg: She might possibly catch the
sound, and He hoped to hear her replying to some of the Stanzas.  His
Guitar was now in tune, and He prepared to strike it.

'But before I begin,' said He 'it is necessary to inform you, Ladies,
that this same Denmark is terribly infested by Sorcerers, Witches, and
Evil Spirits.  Every element possesses its appropriate Daemons.  The
Woods are haunted by a malignant power, called "the Erl- or
Oak-King:"  He it is who blights the Trees, spoils the Harvest, and
commands the Imps and Goblins:  He appears in the form of an old Man of
majestic figure, with a golden Crown and long white beard:  His
principal amusement is to entice young Children from their Parents, and
as soon as He gets them into his Cave, He tears them into a thousand
pieces--The Rivers are governed by another Fiend, called "the
Water-King:" His province is to agitate the deep, occasion
ship-wrecks, and drag the drowning Sailors beneath the waves:  He wears
the appearance of a Warrior, and employs himself in luring young
Virgins into his snare:  What He does with them, when He catches them
in the water, Reverend Ladies, I leave for you to imagine--"The
Fire-King" seems to be a Man all formed of flames:  He raises the
Meteors and wandering lights which beguile Travellers into ponds and
marshes, and He directs the lightning where it may do most
mischief--The last of these elementary Daemons is called "the
Cloud-King;" His figure is that of a beautiful Youth, and He is
distinguished by two large sable Wings:  Though his outside is so
enchanting, He is not a bit better disposed than the Others:  He is
continually employed in raising Storms, tearing up Forests by the
roots, and blowing Castles and Convents about the ears of their
Inhabitants.  The First has a Daughter, who is Queen of the Elves and
Fairies; The Second has a Mother, who is a powerful Enchantress:
Neither of these Ladies are worth more than the Gentlemen:  I do not
remember to have heard any family assigned to the two other Daemons,
but at present I have no business with any of them except the Fiend of
the Waters.  He is the Hero of my Ballad; but I thought it necessary
before I began, to give you some account of his proceedings--'

Theodore then played a short symphony; After which, stretching his
voice to its utmost extent to facilitate its reaching the ear of Agnes,
He sang the following Stanzas.

  THE WATER-KING

  A DANISH BALLAD

  With gentle murmur flowed the Tide,
  While by the fragrant flowery side
  The lovely Maid with carols gay
  To Mary's Church pursued her way.

  The Water-Fiend's malignant eye
  Along the Banks beheld her hie;
  Straight to his Mother-witch He sped,
  And thus in suppliant accents said:

  'Oh! Mother! Mother! now advise,
  How I may yonder Maid surprize:
  Oh!  Mother!  Mother!  Now explain,
  How I may yonder Maid obtain.'

  The Witch She gave him armour white;
  She formed him like a gallant Knight;
  Of water clear next made her hand
  A Steed, whose housings were of sand.

  The Water-King then swift He went;
  To Mary's Church his steps He bent:
  He bound his Courser to the Door,
  And paced the Church-yard three times four.

  His Courser to the door bound He,
  And paced the Church-yard four time three:
  Then hastened up the Aisle, where all
  The People flocked, both great and small.

  The Priest said, as the Knight drew near,
  'And wherefore comes the white Chief here?'
  The lovely Maid She smiled aside;
  'Oh! would I were the white Chief's Bride!'

  He stept o'er Benches one and two;
  'Oh! lovely Maid, I die for You!'
  He stept o'er Benches two and three;
  'Oh! lovely Maiden, go with me!'

  Then sweet She smiled, the lovely Maid,
  And while She gave her hand, She said,
  'Betide me joy, betide me woe,
  O'er Hill, o'er dale, with thee I go.'

  The Priest their hands together joins:
  They dance, while clear the moon-beam shines;
  And little thinks the Maiden bright,
  Her Partner is the Water-spright.

  Oh! had some spirit deigned to sing,
  'Your Partner is the Water-King!'
  The Maid had fear and hate confest,
  And cursed the hand which then She prest.

  But nothing giving cause to think,
  How near She strayed to danger's brink,
  Still on She went, and hand in hand
  The Lovers reached the yellow sand.

  'Ascend this Steed with me, my Dear;
  We needs must cross the streamlet here;
  Ride boldly in; It is not deep;
  The winds are hushed, the billows sleep.'

  Thus spoke the Water-King.  The Maid
  Her Traitor-Bride-groom's wish obeyed:
  And soon She saw the Courser lave
  Delighted in his parent wave.

  'Stop!  Stop! my Love!  The waters blue
  E'en now my shrinking foot bedew!'
  'Oh! lay aside your fears, sweet Heart!
  We now have reached the deepest part.'

  'Stop! Stop! my Love!  For now I see
  The waters rise above my knee.'
  'Oh! lay aside your fears, sweet Heart!
  We now have reached the deepest part.'

  'Stop! Stop! for God's sake, stop! For Oh!
  The waters o'er my bosom flow!'--
  Scarce was the word pronounced, when Knight
  And Courser vanished from her sight.

  She shrieks, but shrieks in vain; for high
  The wild winds rising dull the cry;
  The Fiend exults; The Billows dash,
  And o'er their hapless Victim wash.

  Three times while struggling with the stream,
  The lovely Maid was heard to scream;
  But when the Tempest's rage was o'er,
  The lovely Maid was seen no more.

  Warned by this Tale, ye Damsels fair,
  To whom you give your love beware!
  Believe not every handsome Knight,
  And dance not with the Water-Spright!


The Youth ceased to sing.  The Nuns were delighted with the sweetness
of his voice and masterly manner of touching the Instrument:  But
however acceptable this applause would have been at any other time, at
present it was insipid to Theodore.  His artifice had not succeeded. He
paused in vain between the Stanzas:  No voice replied to his, and He
abandoned the hope of equalling Blondel.

The Convent Bell now warned the Nuns that it was time to assemble in
the Refectory.  They were obliged to quit the Grate; They thanked the
Youth for the entertainment which his Music had afforded them, and
charged him to return the next day.  This He promised: The Nuns, to
give him the greater inclination to keep his word, told him that He
might always depend upon the Convent for his meals, and each of them
made him some little present. One gave him a box of sweetmeats;
Another, an Agnus Dei; Some brought reliques of Saints, waxen Images,
and consecrated Crosses; and Others presented him with pieces of those
works in which the Religious excel, such as embroidery, artificial
flowers, lace, and needlework.  All these He was advised to sell, in
order to put himself into better case; and He was assured that it would
be easy to dispose of them, since the Spaniards hold the performances
of the Nuns in high estimation. Having received these gifts with
seeming respect and gratitude, He remarked that, having no Basket, He
knew not how to convey them away.  Several of the Nuns were hastening
in search of one, when they were stopped by the return of an elderly
Woman, whom Theodore had not till then observed:  Her mild countenance,
and respectable air prejudiced him immediately in her favour.

'Hah!' said the Porteress; 'Here comes the Mother St. Ursula with a
Basket.'

The Nun approached the Grate, and presented the Basket to Theodore:  It
was of willow, lined with blue satin, and upon the four sides were
painted scenes from the legend of St. Genevieve.

'Here is my gift,' said She, as She gave it into his hand; 'Good Youth,
despise it not; Though its value seems insignificant, it has many
hidden virtues.'

She accompanied these words with an expressive look. It was not lost
upon Theodore; In receiving the present, He drew as near the Grate as
possible.

'Agnes!' She whispered in a voice scarcely intelligible. Theodore,
however, caught the sound:  He concluded that some mystery was
concealed in the Basket, and his heart beat with impatience and joy.
At this moment the Domina returned.  Her air was gloomy and frowning,
and She looked if possible more stern than ever.

'Mother St. Ursula, I would speak with you in private.'

The Nun changed colour, and was evidently disconcerted.

'With me?' She replied in a faltering voice.

The Domina motioned that She must follow her, and retired.  The Mother
St. Ursula obeyed her; Soon after, the Refectory Bell ringing a second
time, the Nuns quitted the Grate, and Theodore was left at liberty to
carry off his prize.  Delighted that at length He had obtained some
intelligence for the Marquis, He flew rather than ran, till He reached
the Hotel de las Cisternas.  In a few minutes He stood by his Master's
Bed with the Basket in his hand.  Lorenzo was in the chamber,
endeavouring to reconcile his Friend to a misfortune which He felt
himself but too severely. Theodore related his adventure, and the hopes
which had been created by the Mother St. Ursula's gift.  The Marquis
started from his pillow:  That fire which since the death of Agnes had
been extinguished, now revived in his bosom, and his eyes sparkled with
the eagerness of expectation.  The emotions which Lorenzo's countenance
betrayed, were scarcely weaker, and He waited with inexpressible
impatience for the solution of this mystery. Raymond caught the basket
from the hands of his Page:  He emptied the contents upon the bed, and
examined them with minute attention.  He hoped that a letter would be
found at the bottom; Nothing of the kind appeared.  The search was
resumed, and still with no better success.  At length Don Raymond
observed that one corner of the blue satin lining was unripped; He tore
it open hastily, and drew forth a small scrap of paper neither folded
or sealed.  It was addressed to the Marquis de las Cisternas, and the
contents were as follows.

Having recognised your Page, I venture to send these few lines. Procure
an order from the Cardinal-Duke for seizing my Person, and that of the
Domina; But let it not be executed till Friday at midnight.  It is the
Festival of St. Clare:  There will be a procession of Nuns by
torch-light, and I shall be among them. Beware not to let your
intention be known:  Should a syllable be dropt to excite the Domina's
suspicions, you will never hear of me more.  Be cautious, if you prize
the memory of Agnes, and wish to punish her Assassins.  I have that to
tell, will freeze your blood with horror.      St. Ursula.

No sooner had the Marquis read the note than He fell back upon his
pillow deprived of sense or motion.  The hope failed him which till now
had supported his existence; and these lines convinced him but too
positively that Agnes was indeed no more. Lorenzo felt this
circumstance less forcibly, since it had always been his idea that his
Sister had perished by unfair means.  When He found by the Mother St.
Ursula's letter how true were his suspicions, the confirmation excited
no other sentiment in his bosom than a wish to punish the Murderers as
they deserved.  It was no easy task to recall the Marquis to himself.
As soon as He recovered his speech, He broke out into execrations
against the Assassins of his Beloved, and vowed to take upon them a
signal vengeance.  He continued to rave and torment himself with
impotent passion till his constitution, enfeebled by grief and illness,
could support itself no longer, and He relapsed into insensibility.
His melancholy situation sincerely affected Lorenzo, who would
willingly have remained in the apartment of his Friend; But other cares
now demanded his presence.  It was necessary to procure the order for
seizing the Prioress of St. Clare.  For this purpose, having committed
Raymond to the care of the best Physicians in Madrid, He quitted the
Hotel de las Cisternas, and bent his course towards the Palace of the
Cardinal-Duke.

His disappointment was excessive, when He found that affairs of State
had obliged the Cardinal to set out for a distant Province.

It wanted but five to Friday:  Yet by travelling day and night, He
hoped to return in time for the Pilgrimage of St. Clare.  In this He
succeeded.  He found the Cardinal-Duke; and represented to him the
supposed culpability of the Prioress, as also the violent effects which
it had produced upon Don Raymond.  He could have used no argument so
forcible as this last.  Of all his Nephews, the Marquis was the only
one to whom the Cardinal-Duke was sincerely attached:  He perfectly
doated upon him, and the Prioress could have committed no greater crime
in his eyes than to have endangered the life of the Marquis.
Consequently, He granted the order of arrest without difficulty:  He
also gave Lorenzo a letter to a principal Officer of the Inquisition,
desiring him to see his mandate executed.  Furnished with these papers,
Medina hastened back to Madrid, which He reached on the Friday a few
hours before dark.  He found the Marquis somewhat easier, but so weak
and exhausted that without great exertion He could neither speak or
more. Having past an hour by his Bedside, Lorenzo left him to
communicate his design to his Uncle, as also to give Don Ramirez de
Mello the Cardinal's letter.  The First was petrified with horror when
He learnt the fate of his unhappy Niece:  He encouraged Lorenzo to
punish her Assassins, and engaged to accompany him at night to St.
Clare's Convent.  Don Ramirez promised his firmest support, and
selected a band of trusty Archers to prevent opposition on the part of
the Populace.

But while Lorenzo was anxious to unmask one religious Hypocrite, He was
unconscious of the sorrows prepared for him by Another. Aided by
Matilda's infernal Agents, Ambrosio had resolved upon the innocent
Antonia's ruin.  The moment destined to be so fatal to her arrived.
She had taken leave of her Mother for the night.

As She kissed her, She felt an unusual despondency infuse itself into
her bosom.  She left her, and returned to her instantly, threw herself
into her maternal arms, and bathed her cheek with tears:  She felt
uneasy at quitting her, and a secret presentiment assured her that
never must they meet again.  Elvira observed, and tried to laugh her
out of this childish prejudice: She chid her mildly for encouraging
such ungrounded sadness, and warned her how dangerous it was to
encourage such ideas.

To all her remonstrances She received no other answer than,

'Mother! Dear Mother! Oh! would to God, it were Morning!'

Elvira, whose inquietude respecting her Daughter was a great obstacle
to her perfect reestablishment, was still labouring under the effects
of her late severe illness.  She was this Evening more than usually
indisposed, and retired to bed before her accustomed hour.  Antonia
withdrew from her Mother's chamber with regret, and till the Door
closed, kept her eyes fixed upon her with melancholy expression.  She
retired to her own apartment; Her heart was filled with bitterness:  It
seemed to her that all her prospects were blasted, and the world
contained nothing for which it was worth existing.  She sank into a
Chair, reclined her head upon her arm, and gazed upon the floor with a
vacant stare, while the most gloomy images floated before her fancy.
She was still in this state of insensibility when She was disturbed by
hearing a strain of soft Music breathed beneath her window.  She rose,
drew near the Casement, and opened it to hear it more distinctly.
Having thrown her veil over her face, She ventured to look out.  By the
light of the Moon She perceived several Men below with Guitars and
Lutes in their hands; and at a little distance from them stood Another
wrapped in his cloak, whose stature and appearance bore a strong
resemblance to Lorenzo's.  She was not deceived in this conjecture.  It
was indeed Lorenzo himself, who bound by his word not to present
himself to Antonia without his Uncle's consent, endeavoured by
occasional Serenades, to convince his Mistress that his attachment
still existed.  His stratagem had not the desired effect.  Antonia was
far from supposing that this nightly music was intended as a compliment
to her: She was too modest to think herself worthy such attentions; and
concluding them to be addressed to some neighbouring Lady, She grieved
to find that they were offered by Lorenzo.

The air which was played, was plaintive and melodious. It accorded with
the state of Antonia's mind, and She listened with pleasure.  After a
symphony of some length, it was succeeded by the sound of voices, and
Antonia distinguished the following words.

  SERENADE

      Chorus

  Oh! Breathe in gentle strain, my Lyre!
  'Tis here that Beauty loves to rest:
  Describe the pangs of fond desire,
  Which rend a faithful Lover's breast.

      Song

  In every heart to find a Slave,
  In every Soul to fix his reign,
  In bonds to lead the wise and brave,
  And make the Captives kiss his chain,
  Such is the power of Love, and Oh!
  I grieve so well Love's power to know.

  In sighs to pass the live-long day,
  To taste a short and broken sleep,
  For one dear Object far away,
  All others scorned, to watch and weep,
  Such are the pains of Love, and Oh!
  I grieve so well Love's pains to know!

  To read consent in virgin eyes,
  To press the lip ne'er prest till then
  To hear the sigh of transport rise,
  And kiss, and kiss, and kiss again,
  Such are thy pleasures, Love, But Oh!
  When shall my heart thy pleasures know?

      Chorus

  Now hush, my Lyre!  My voice be still!
  Sleep, gentle Maid!  May fond desire
  With amorous thoughts thy visions fill,
  Though still my voice, and hushed my Lyre.


The Music ceased:  The Performers dispersed, and silence prevailed
through the Street.  Antonia quitted the window with regret:  She as
usual recommended herself to the protection of St. Rosolia, said her
accustomed prayers, and retired to bed. Sleep was not long absent, and
his presence relieved her from her terrors and inquietude.

It was almost two o'clock before the lustful Monk ventured to bend his
steps towards Antonia's dwelling.  It has been already mentioned that
the Abbey was at no great distance from the Strada di San Iago.  He
reached the House unobserved.  Here He stopped, and hesitated for a
moment.  He reflected on the enormity of the crime, the consequences of
a discovery, and the probability, after what had passed, of Elvira's
suspecting him to be her Daughter's Ravisher:  On the other hand it was
suggested that She could do no more than suspect; that no proofs of his
guilt could be produced; that it would seem impossible for the rape to
have been committed without Antonia's knowing when, where, or by whom;
and finally, He believed that his fame was too firmly established to be
shaken by the unsupported accusations of two unknown Women.  This
latter argument was perfectly false:  He knew not how uncertain is the
air of popular applause, and that a moment suffices to make him today
the detestation of the world, who yesterday was its Idol.  The result
of the Monk's deliberations was that He should proceed in his
enterprize.  He ascended the steps leading to the House.  No sooner did
He touch the door with the silver Myrtle, than it flew open, and
presented him with a free passage.  He entered, and the door closed
after him of its own accord.

Guided by the moonbeams, He proceeded up the Staircase with slow and
cautious steps.  He looked round him every moment with apprehension and
anxiety.  He saw a Spy in every shadow, and heard a voice in every
murmur of the night breeze.  Consciousness of the guilty business on
which He was employed appalled his heart, and rendered it more timid
than a Woman's.  Yet still He proceeded.  He reached the door of
Antonia's chamber. He stopped, and listened.  All was hushed within.
The total silence persuaded him that his intended Victim was retired to
rest, and He ventured to lift up the Latch.  The door was fastened, and
resisted his efforts:  But no sooner was it touched by the Talisman,
than the Bolt flew back. The Ravisher stept on, and found himself in
the chamber, where slept the innocent Girl, unconscious how dangerous a
Visitor was drawing near her Couch. The door closed after him, and the
Bolt shot again into its fastening.

Ambrosio advanced with precaution.  He took care that not a board
should creak under his foot, and held in his breath as He approached
the Bed.  His first attention was to perform the magic ceremony, as
Matilda had charged him:  He breathed thrice upon the silver Myrtle,
pronounced over it Antonia's name, and laid it upon her pillow.  The
effects which it had already produced permitted not his doubting its
success in prolonging the slumbers of his devoted Mistress.  No sooner
was the enchantment performed than He considered her to be absolutely
in his power, and his eyes flamed with lust and impatience.  He now
ventured to cast a glance upon the sleeping Beauty.  A single Lamp,
burning before the Statue of St. Rosolia, shed a faint light through
the room, and permitted him to examine all the charms of the lovely
Object before him.  The heat of the weather had obliged her to throw
off part of the Bed-cloathes:  Those which still covered her,
Ambrosio's insolent hand hastened to remove.  She lay with her cheek
reclining upon one ivory arm; The Other rested on the side of the Bed
with graceful indolence.  A few tresses of her hair had escaped from
beneath the Muslin which confined the rest, and fell carelessly over
her bosom, as it heaved with slow and regular suspiration.  The warm
air had spread her cheek with higher colour than usual.  A smile
inexpressibly sweet played round her ripe and coral lips, from which
every now and then escaped a gentle sigh or an half-pronounced
sentence.  An air of enchanting innocence and candour pervaded her
whole form; and there was a sort of modesty in her very nakedness which
added fresh stings to the desires of the lustful Monk.

He remained for some moments devouring those charms with his eyes which
soon were to be subjected to his ill-regulated passions.  Her mouth
half-opened seemed to solicit a kiss:  He bent over her; he joined his
lips to hers, and drew in the fragrance of her breath with rapture.
This momentary pleasure increased his longing for still greater.  His
desires were raised to that frantic height by which Brutes are
agitated.  He resolved not to delay for one instant longer the
accomplishment of his wishes, and hastily proceeded to tear off those
garments which impeded the gratification of his lust.

'Gracious God!' exclaimed a voice behind him; 'Am I not deceived?

Is not this an illusion?'

Terror, confusion, and disappointment accompanied these words, as they
struck Ambrosio's hearing.  He started, and turned towards it.  Elvira
stood at the door of the chamber, and regarded the Monk with looks of
surprize and detestation.

A frightful dream had represented to her Antonia on the verge of a
precipice.  She saw her trembling on the brink:  Every moment seemed to
threaten her fall, and She heard her exclaim with shrieks, 'Save me,
Mother! Save me!--Yet a moment, and it will be too late!'  Elvira woke
in terror.  The vision had made too strong an impression upon her mind,
to permit her resting till assured of her Daughter's safety.  She
hastily started from her Bed, threw on a loose night-gown, and passing
through the Closet in which slept the Waiting-woman, She reached
Antonia's chamber just in time to rescue her from the grasp of the
Ravisher.

His shame and her amazement seemed to have petrified into Statues both
Elvira and the Monk:  They remained gazing upon each other in silence.
The Lady was the first to recover herself.

'It is no dream!'  She cried; 'It is really Ambrosio, who stands before
me!  It is the Man whom Madrid esteems a Saint, that I find at this
late hour near the Couch of my unhappy Child! Monster of Hypocrisy!  I
already suspected your designs, but forbore your accusation in pity to
human frailty.  Silence would now be criminal:  The whole City shall be
informed of your incontinence.  I will unmask you, Villain, and
convince the Church what a Viper She cherishes in her bosom.'

Pale and confused the baffled Culprit stood trembling before her.

He would fain have extenuated his offence, but could find no apology
for his conduct:  He could produce nothing but broken sentences, and
excuses which contradicted each other.  Elvira was too justly incensed
to grant the pardon which He requested.  She protested that She would
raise the neighbourhood, and make him an example to all future
Hypocrites.  Then hastening to the Bed, She called to Antonia to wake;
and finding that her voice had no effect, She took her arm, and raised
her forcibly from the pillow.  The charm operated too powerfully.
Antonia remained insensible, and on being released by her Mother, sank
back upon the pillow.

'This slumber cannot be natural!' cried the amazed Elvira, whose
indignation increased with every moment. 'Some mystery is concealed in
it; But tremble, Hypocrite; all your villainy shall soon be unravelled!
Help! Help!' She exclaimed aloud; 'Within there!  Flora! Flora!'

'Hear me for one moment, Lady!' cried the Monk, restored to himself by
the urgency of the danger; 'By all that is sacred and holy, I swear
that your Daughter's honour is still unviolated. Forgive my
transgression!  Spare me the shame of a discovery, and permit me to
regain the Abbey undisturbed.  Grant me this request in mercy!  I
promise not only that Antonia shall be secure from me in future, but
that the rest of my life shall prove .....'

Elvira interrupted him abruptly.

'Antonia secure from you?  _I_ will secure her!  You shall betray no
longer the confidence of Parents!  Your iniquity shall be unveiled to
the public eye:  All Madrid shall shudder at your perfidy, your
hypocrisy and incontinence.  What Ho! there! Flora! Flora, I say!'

While She spoke thus, the remembrance of Agnes struck upon his mind.
Thus had She sued to him for mercy, and thus had He refused her prayer!
It was now his turn to suffer, and He could not but acknowledge that
his punishment was just.  In the meanwhile Elvira continued to call
Flora to her assistance; but her voice was so choaked with passion that
the Servant, who was buried in profound slumber, was insensible to all
her cries: Elvira dared not go towards the Closet in which Flora slept,
lest the Monk should take that opportunity to escape.  Such indeed was
his intention:  He trusted that could He reach the Abbey unobserved by
any other than Elvira, her single testimony would not suffice to ruin a
reputation so well established as his was in Madrid.  With this idea He
gathered up such garments as He had already thrown off, and hastened
towards the Door.  Elvira was aware of his design; She followed him,
and ere He could draw back the bolt, seized him by the arm, and
detained him.

'Attempt not to fly!' said She; 'You quit not this room without
Witnesses of your guilt.'

Ambrosio struggled in vain to disengage himself.  Elvira quitted not
her hold, but redoubled her cries for succour.  The Friar's danger grew
more urgent.  He expected every moment to hear people assembling at her
voice; And worked up to madness by the approach of ruin, He adopted a
resolution equally desperate and savage. Turning round suddenly, with
one hand He grasped Elvira's throat so as to prevent her continuing her
clamour, and with the other, dashing her violently upon the ground, He
dragged her towards the Bed.  Confused by this unexpected attack, She
scarcely had power to strive at forcing herself from his grasp:  While
the Monk, snatching the pillow from beneath her Daughter's head,
covering with it Elvira's face, and pressing his knee upon her stomach
with all his strength, endeavoured to put an end to her existence.  He
succeeded but too well.  Her natural strength increased by the excess
of anguish, long did the Sufferer struggle to disengage herself, but in
vain.  The Monk continued to kneel upon her breast, witnessed without
mercy the convulsive trembling of her limbs beneath him, and sustained
with inhuman firmness the spectacle of her agonies, when soul and body
were on the point of separating.  Those agonies at length were over.
She ceased to struggle for life.  The Monk took off the pillow, and
gazed upon her.  Her face was covered with a frightful blackness:

Her limbs moved no more; The blood was chilled in her veins; Her heart
had forgotten to beat, and her hands were stiff and frozen.

Ambrosio beheld before him that once noble and majestic form, now
become a Corse, cold, senseless and disgusting.

This horrible act was no sooner perpetrated, than the Friar beheld the
enormity of his crime.  A cold dew flowed over his limbs; his eyes
closed; He staggered to a chair, and sank into it almost as lifeless as
the Unfortunate who lay extended at his feet.  From this state He was
rouzed by the necessity of flight, and the danger of being found in
Antonia's apartment.  He had no desire to profit by the execution of
his crime.  Antonia now appeared to him an object of disgust.  A deadly
cold had usurped the place of that warmth which glowed in his bosom:
No ideas offered themselves to his mind but those of death and guilt,
of present shame and future punishment.  Agitated by remorse and fear
He prepared for flight:  Yet his terrors did not so compleatly master
his recollection, as to prevent his taking the precautions necessary
for his safety.  He replaced the pillow upon the bed, gathered up his
garments, and with the fatal Talisman in his hand, bent his unsteady
steps towards the door. Bewildered by fear, He fancied that his flight
was opposed by Legions of Phantoms; Whereever He turned, the disfigured
Corse seemed to lie in his passage, and it was long before He succeeded
in reaching the door.  The enchanted Myrtle produced its former effect.
The door opened, and He hastened down the staircase. He entered the
Abbey unobserved, and having shut himself into his Cell, He abandoned
his soul to the tortures of unavailing remorse, and terrors of
impending detection.