II

  ----These are the Villains
  Whom all the Travellers do fear so much.
  --------Some of them are Gentlemen
  Such as the fury of ungoverned Youth
  Thrust from the company of awful Men.
         Two Gentlemen of Verona.

The Marquis and Lorenzo proceeded to the Hotel in silence.  The Former
employed himself in calling every circumstance to his mind, which
related might give Lorenzo's the most favourable idea of his connexion
with Agnes.  The Latter, justly alarmed for the honour of his family,
felt embarrassed by the presence of the Marquis: The adventure which He
had just witnessed forbad his treating him as a Friend; and Antonia's
interests being entrusted to his mediation, He saw the impolicy of
treating him as a Foe. He concluded from these reflections, that
profound silence would be the wisest plan, and waited with impatience
for Don Raymond's explanation.

They arrived at the Hotel de las Cisternas.  The Marquis immediately
conducted him to his apartment, and began to express his satisfaction
at finding him at Madrid.  Lorenzo interrupted him.

'Excuse me, my Lord,' said He with a distant air, 'if I reply somewhat
coldly to your expressions of regard.  A Sister's honour is involved in
this affair:  Till that is established, and the purport of your
correspondence with Agnes cleared up, I cannot consider you as my
Friend.  I am anxious to hear the meaning of your conduct, and hope
that you will not delay the promised explanation.'

'First give me your word, that you will listen with patience and
indulgence.'

'I love my Sister too well to judge her harshly; and till this moment I
possessed no Friend so dear to me as yourself.  I will also confess,
that your having it in your power to oblige me in a business which I
have much at heart, makes me very anxious to find you still deserving
my esteem.'

'Lorenzo, you transport me!  No greater pleasure can be given me, than
an opportunity of serving the Brother of Agnes.'

'Convince me that I can accept your favours without dishonour, and
there is no Man in the world to whom I am more willing to be obliged.'

'Probably, you have already heard your Sister mention the name of
Alphonso d'Alvarada?'

'Never.  Though I feel for Agnes an affection truly fraternal,
circumstances have prevented us from being much together.  While yet a
Child She was consigned to the care of her Aunt, who had married a
German Nobleman.  At his Castle She remained till two years since, when
She returned to Spain, determined upon secluding herself from the
world.'

'Good God!  Lorenzo, you knew of her intention, and yet strove not to
make her change it?'

'Marquis, you wrong me.  The intelligence, which I received at Naples,
shocked me extremely, and I hastened my return to Madrid for the
express purpose of preventing the sacrifice.  The moment that I
arrived, I flew to the Convent of St. Clare, in which Agnes had chosen
to perform her Noviciate.  I requested to see my Sister.  Conceive my
surprise when She sent me a refusal; She declared positively, that
apprehending my influence over her mind, She would not trust herself in
my society till the day before that on which She was to receive the
Veil.  I supplicated the Nuns; I insisted upon seeing Agnes, and
hesitated not to avow my suspicions that her being kept from me was
against her own inclinations. To free herself from the imputation of
violence, the Prioress brought me a few lines written in my Sister's
well-known hand, repeating the message already delivered.  All future
attempts to obtain a moment's conversation with her were as fruitless
as the first.  She was inflexible, and I was not permitted to see her
till the day preceding that on which She entered the Cloister never to
quit it more.  This interview took place in the presence of our
principal Relations.  It was for the first time since her childhood
that I saw her, and the scene was most affecting.  She threw herself
upon my bosom, kissed me, and wept bitterly.  By every possible
argument, by tears, by prayers, by kneeling, I strove to make her
abandon her intention.  I represented to her all the hardships of a
religious life; I painted to her imagination all the pleasures which
She was going to quit, and besought her to disclose to me, what
occasioned her disgust to the world.  At this last question She turned
pale, and her tears flowed yet faster.  She entreated me not to press
her on that subject; That it sufficed me to know that her resolution
was taken, and that a Convent was the only place where She could now
hope for tranquillity.  She persevered in her design, and made her
profession.  I visited her frequently at the Grate, and every moment
that I passed with her, made me feel more affliction at her loss.  I
was shortly after obliged to quit Madrid; I returned but yesterday
evening, and since then have not had time to call at St. Clare's
Convent.'

'Then till I mentioned it, you never heard the name of Alphonso
d'Alvarada?'

'Pardon me: my Aunt wrote me word that an Adventurer so called had
found means to get introduced into the Castle of Lindenberg; That He
had insinuated himself into my Sister's good graces, and that She had
even consented to elope with him.  However, before the plan could be
executed, the Cavalier discovered that the estates which He believed
Agnes to possess in Hispaniola, in reality belonged to me.  This
intelligence made him change his intention; He disappeared on the day
that the elopement was to have taken place, and Agnes, in despair at
his perfidy and meanness, had resolved upon seclusion in a Convent.
She added, that as this adventurer had given himself out to be a Friend
of mine, She wished to know whether I had any knowledge of him.  I
replied in the negative.  I had then very little idea, that Alphonso
d'Alvarada and the Marquis de las Cisternas were one and the same
person:  The description given me of the first by no means tallied with
what I knew of the latter.'

'In this I easily recognize Donna Rodolpha's perfidious character.
Every word of this account is stamped with marks of her malice, of her
falsehood, of her talents for misrepresenting those whom She wishes to
injure.  Forgive me, Medina, for speaking so freely of your Relation.
The mischief which She has done me authorises my resentment, and when
you have heard my story, you will be convinced that my expressions have
not been too severe.'

He then began his narrative in the following manner.

HISTORY OF DON RAYMOND, MARQUIS DE LAS CISTERNAS

Long experience, my dear Lorenzo, has convinced me how generous is your
nature:  I waited not for your declaration of ignorance respecting your
Sister's adventures to suppose that they had been purposely concealed
from you.  Had they reached your knowledge, from what misfortunes
should both Agnes and myself have escaped!  Fate had ordained it
otherwise!  You were on your Travels when I first became acquainted
with your Sister; and as our Enemies took care to conceal from her your
direction, it was impossible for her to implore by letter your
protection and advice.

On leaving Salamanca, at which University as I have since heard, you
remained a year after I quitted it, I immediately set out upon my
Travels.  My Father supplied me liberally with money; But He insisted
upon my concealing my rank, and presenting myself as no more than a
private Gentleman.  This command was issued by the counsels of his
Friend, the Duke of Villa Hermosa, a Nobleman for whose abilities and
knowledge of the world I have ever entertained the most profound
veneration.

'Believe me,' said He, 'my dear Raymond, you will hereafter feel the
benefits of this temporary degradation.  'Tis true, that as the Conde
de las Cisternas you would have been received with open arms; and your
youthful vanity might have felt gratified by the attentions showered
upon you from all sides.  At present, much will depend upon yourself:
You have excellent recommendations, but it must be your own business to
make them of use to you.  You must lay yourself out to please; You must
labour to gain the approbation of those, to whom you are presented:
They who would have courted the friendship of the Conde de las
Cisternas will have no interest in finding out the merits, or bearing
patiently with the faults, of Alphonso d'Alvarada.  Consequently, when
you find yourself really liked, you may safely ascribe it to your good
qualities, not your rank, and the distinction shown you will be
infinitely more flattering.  Besides, your exalted birth would not
permit your mixing with the lower classes of society, which will now be
in your power, and from which, in my opinion, you will derive
considerable benefit.  Do not confine yourself to the Illustrious of
those Countries through which you pass.  Examine the manners and
customs of the multitude: Enter into the Cottages; and by observing how
the Vassals of Foreigners are treated, learn to diminish the burthens
and augment the comforts of your own.  According to my ideas, of those
advantages which a Youth destined to the possession of power and wealth
may reap from travel, He should not consider as the least essential,
the opportunity of mixing with the classes below him, and becoming an
eyewitness of the sufferings of the People.'

Forgive me, Lorenzo, if I seem tedious in my narration. The close
connexion which now exists between us, makes me anxious that you should
know every particular respecting me; and in my fear of omitting the
least circumstance which may induce you to think favourably of your
Sister and myself, I may possibly relate many which you may think
uninteresting.

I followed the Duke's advice; I was soon convinced of its wisdom.

I quitted Spain, calling myself by the assumed title of Don Alphonso
d'Alvarada, and attended by a single Domestic of approved fidelity.
Paris was my first station.  For some time I was enchanted with it, as
indeed must be every Man who is young, rich, and fond of pleasure.  Yet
among all its gaieties, I felt that something was wanting to my heart.
I grew sick of dissipation: I discovered, that the People among whom I
lived, and whose exterior was so polished and seducing, were at bottom
frivolous, unfeeling and insincere.  I turned from the Inhabitants of
Paris with disgust, and quitted that Theatre of Luxury without heaving
one sigh of regret.

I now bent my course towards Germany, intending to visit most of the
principal courts:  Prior to this expedition, I meant to make some
little stay at Strasbourg.  On quitting my Chaise at Luneville to take
some refreshment, I observed a splendid Equipage, attended by four
Domestics in rich liveries, waiting at the door of the Silver Lion.
Soon after as I looked out of the window, I saw a Lady of noble
presence, followed by two female Attendants, step into the Carriage,
which drove off immediately.

I enquired of the Host, who the Lady was, that had just departed.

'A German Baroness, Monsieur, of great rank and fortune.  She has been
upon a visit to the Duchess of Longueville, as her Servants informed
me; She is going to Strasbourg, where She will find her Husband, and
then both return to their Castle in Germany.'

I resumed my journey, intending to reach Strasbourg that night. My
hopes, however were frustrated by the breaking down of my Chaise.  The
accident happened in the middle of a thick Forest, and I was not a
little embarrassed as to the means of proceeding.

It was the depth of winter:  The night was already closing round us;
and Strasbourg, which was the nearest Town, was still distant from us
several leagues.  It seemed to me that my only alternative to passing
the night in the Forest, was to take my Servant's Horse and ride on to
Strasbourg, an undertaking at that season very far from agreeable.
However, seeing no other resource, I was obliged to make up my mind to
it.  Accordingly I communicated my design to the Postillion, telling
him that I would send People to assist him as soon as I reached
Strasbourg. I had not much confidence in his honesty; But Stephano
being well-armed, and the Driver to all appearance considerably
advanced in years, I believed I ran no danger of losing my Baggage.

Luckily, as I then thought, an opportunity presented itself of passing
the night more agreeably than I expected.  On mentioning my design of
proceeding by myself to Strasbourg, the Postillion shook his head in
disapprobation.

'It is a long way,' said He; 'You will find it a difficult matter to
arrive there without a Guide.  Besides, Monsieur seems unaccustomed to
the season's severity, and 'tis possible that unable to sustain the
excessive cold....'

'What use is there to present me with all these objections?' said I,
impatiently interrupting him; 'I have no other resource:  I run still
greater risque of perishing with cold by passing the night in the
Forest.'

'Passing the night in the Forest?' He replied; 'Oh! by St. Denis! We
are not in quite so bad a plight as that comes to yet.  If I am not
mistaken, we are scarcely five minutes walk from the Cottage of my old
Friend, Baptiste.  He is a Wood-cutter, and a very honest Fellow. I
doubt not but He will shelter you for the night with pleasure.  In the
meantime I can take the saddle-Horse, ride to Strasbourg, and be back
with proper people to mend your Carriage by break of day.'

'And in the name of God,' said I, 'How could you leave me so long in
suspense?  Why did you not tell me of this Cottage sooner? What
excessive stupidity!'

'I thought that perhaps Monsieur would not deign to accept....'

'Absurd! Come, come!  Say no more, but conduct us without delay to the
Wood-man's Cottage.'

He obeyed, and we moved onwards:  The Horses contrived with some
difficulty to drag the shattered vehicle after us.  My Servant was
become almost speechless, and I began to feel the effects of the cold
myself, before we reached the wished-for Cottage.  It was a small but
neat Building:  As we drew near it, I rejoiced at observing through the
window the blaze of a comfortable fire. Our Conductor knocked at the
door:  It was some time before any one answered; The People within
seemed in doubt whether we should be admitted.

'Come!  Come, Friend Baptiste!' cried the Driver with impatience; 'What
are you about?  Are you asleep?  Or will you refuse a night's lodging
to a Gentleman, whose Chaise has just broken down in the Forest?'

'Ah! is it you, honest Claude?' replied a Man's voice from within;
'Wait a moment, and the door shall be opened.'

Soon after the bolts were drawn back.  The door was unclosed, and a Man
presented himself to us with a Lamp in his hand.  He gave the Guide an
hearty reception, and then addressed himself to me.

'Walk in, Monsieur; Walk in, and welcome!  Excuse me for not admitting
you at first:  But there are so many Rogues about this place, that
saving your presence, I suspected you to be one.'

Thus saying, He ushered me into the room, where I had observed the
fire:  I was immediately placed in an Easy Chair, which stood close to
the Hearth.  A Female, whom I supposed to be the Wife of my Host, rose
from her seat upon my entrance, and received me with a slight and
distant reverence.  She made no answer to my compliment, but
immediately re-seating herself, continued the work on which She had
been employed.  Her Husband's manners were as friendly as hers were
harsh and repulsive.

'I wish, I could lodge you more conveniently, Monsieur,' said He; 'But
we cannot boast of much spare room in this hovel.  However, a chamber
for yourself, and another for your Servant, I think, we can make shift
to supply.  You must content yourself with sorry fare; But to what we
have, believe me, you are heartily welcome.' ----Then turning to his
wife--'Why, how you sit there, Marguerite, with as much tranquillity as
if you had nothing better to do!  Stir about, Dame!  Stir about! Get
some supper; Look out some sheets; Here, here; throw some logs upon the
fire, for the Gentleman seems perished with cold.'

The Wife threw her work hastily upon the Table, and proceeded to
execute his commands with every mark of unwillingness.  Her countenance
had displeased me on the first moment of my examining it.  Yet upon the
whole her features were handsome unquestionably; But her skin was
sallow, and her person thin and meagre; A louring gloom over-spread her
countenance; and it bore such visible marks of rancour and ill-will, as
could not escape being noticed by the most inattentive Observer.  Her
every look and action expressed discontent and impatience, and the
answers which She gave Baptiste, when He reproached her good-humouredly
for her dissatisfied air, were tart, short, and cutting.  In tine, I
conceived at first sight equal disgust for her, and prepossession in
favour of her Husband, whose appearance was calculated to inspire
esteem and confidence.  His countenance was open, sincere, and
friendly; his manners had all the Peasant's honesty unaccompanied by
his rudeness; His cheeks were broad, full, and ruddy; and in the
solidity of his person He seemed to offer an ample apology for the
leanness of his Wife's.  From the wrinkles on his brow I judged him to
be turned of sixty; But He bore his years well, and seemed still hearty
and strong: The Wife could not be more than thirty, but in spirits and
vivacity She was infinitely older than the Husband.

However, in spite of her unwillingness, Marguerite began to prepare the
supper, while the Wood-man conversed gaily on different subjects.  The
Postillion, who had been furnished with a bottle of spirits, was now
ready to set out for Strasbourg, and enquired, whether I had any
further commands.

'For Strasbourg?' interrupted Baptiste; 'You are not going thither
tonight?'

'I beg your pardon:  If I do not fetch Workmen to mend the Chaise, How
is Monsieur to proceed tomorrow?'

'That is true, as you say; I had forgotten the Chaise.  Well, but
Claude; You may at least eat your supper here?  That can make you lose
very little time, and Monsieur looks too kind-hearted to send you out
with an empty stomach on such a bitter cold night as this is.'

To this I readily assented, telling the Postillion that my reaching
Strasbourg the next day an hour or two later would be perfectly
immaterial.  He thanked me, and then leaving the Cottage with Stephano,
put up his Horses in the Wood-man's Stable.  Baptiste followed them to
the door, and looked out with anxiety.

''Tis a sharp biting wind!' said He; 'I wonder, what detains my Boys so
long!  Monsieur, I shall show you two of the finest Lads, that ever
stept in shoe of leather. The eldest is three and twenty, the second a
year younger:  Their Equals for sense, courage, and activity, are not
to be found within fifty miles of Strasbourg.  Would They were back
again!  I begin to feel uneasy about them.'

Marguerite was at this time employed in laying the cloth.

'And are you equally anxious for the return of your Sons?' said I to
her.

'Not I!' She replied peevishly; 'They are no children of mine.'

'Come!  Come, Marguerite!' said the Husband; 'Do not be out of humour
with the Gentleman for asking a simple question.  Had you not looked so
cross, He would never have thought you old enough to have a Son of
three and twenty:  But you see how many years ill-temper adds to
you!--Excuse my Wife's rudeness, Monsieur.  A little thing puts her
out, and She is somewhat displeased at your not thinking her to be
under thirty.  That is the truth, is it not, Marguerite?  You know,
Monsieur, that Age is always a ticklish subject with a Woman.  Come!
come!  Marguerite, clear up a little.  If you have not Sons as old, you
will some twenty years hence, and I hope, that we shall live to see
them just such Lads as Jacques and Robert.'

Marguerite clasped her hands together passionately.

'God forbid!' said She; 'God forbid! If I thought it, I would strangle
them with my own hands!'

She quitted the room hastily, and went up stairs.

I could not help expressing to the Wood-man how much I pitied him for
being chained for life to a Partner of such ill-humour.

'Ah!  Lord!  Monsieur, Every one has his share of grievances, and
Marguerite has fallen to mine.  Besides, after all She is only cross,
and not malicious.  The worst is, that her affection for two children
by a former Husband makes her play the Step-mother with my two Sons.
She cannot bear the sight of them, and by her good-will they would
never set a foot within my door.  But on this point I always stand
firm, and never will consent to abandon the poor Lads to the world's
mercy, as She has often solicited me to do.  In every thing else I let
her have her own way; and truly She manages a family rarely, that I
must say for her.'

We were conversing in this manner, when our discourse was interrupted
by a loud halloo, which rang through the Forest.

'My Sons, I hope!' exclaimed the Wood-man, and ran to open the door.

The halloo was repeated:  We now distinguished the trampling of Horses,
and soon after a Carriage, attended by several Cavaliers stopped at the
Cottage door.  One of the Horsemen enquired how far they were still
from Strasbourg.  As He addressed himself to me, I answered in the
number of miles which Claude had told me; Upon which a volley of curses
was vented against the Drivers for having lost their way.  The Persons
in the Coach were now informed of the distance of Strasbourg, and also
that the Horses were so fatigued as to be incapable of proceeding
further.  A Lady, who appeared to be the principal, expressed much
chagrin at this intelligence; But as there was no remedy, one of the
Attendants asked the Wood-man, whether He could furnish them with
lodging for the night.

He seemed much embarrassed, and replied in the negative; Adding that a
Spanish Gentleman and his Servant were already in possession of the
only spare apartments in his House.  On hearing this, the gallantry of
my nation would not permit me to retain those accommodations, of which
a Female was in want.  I instantly signified to the Wood-man, that I
transferred my right to the Lady; He made some objections; But I
overruled them, and hastening to the Carriage, opened the door, and
assisted the Lady to descend.  I immediately recognized her for the
same person whom I had seen at the Inn at Luneville.  I took an
opportunity of asking one of her Attendants, what was her name?

'The Baroness Lindenberg,' was the answer.

I could not but remark how different a reception our Host had given
these newcomers and myself.  His reluctance to admit them was visibly
expressed on his countenance, and He prevailed on himself with
difficulty to tell the Lady that She was welcome. I conducted her into
the House, and placed her in the armed-chair, which I had just quitted.
She thanked me very graciously; and made a thousand apologies for
putting me to an inconvenience.  Suddenly the Wood-man's countenance
cleared up.

'At last I have arranged it!' said He, interrupting her excuses; 'I can
lodge you and your suite, Madam, and you will not be under the
necessity of making this Gentleman suffer for his politeness.

We have two spare chambers, one for the Lady, the other, Monsieur, for
you:  My Wife shall give up hers to the two Waiting-women; As for the
Men-servants, they must content themselves with passing the night in a
large Barn, which stands at a few yards distance from the House.  There
they shall have a blazing fire, and as good a supper as we can make
shift to give them.'

After several expressions of gratitude on the Lady's part, and
opposition on mine to Marguerite's giving up her bed, this arrangement
was agreed to.  As the Room was small, the Baroness immediately
dismissed her Male Domestics:  Baptiste was on the point of conducting
them to the Barn which He had mentioned when two young Men appeared at
the door of the Cottage.

'Hell and Furies!' exclaimed the first starting back; 'Robert, the
House is filled with Strangers!'

'Ha!  There are my Sons!' cried our Host.  'Why, Jacques! Robert!
whither are you running, Boys?  There is room enough still for you.'

Upon this assurance the Youths returned.  The Father presented them to
the Baroness and myself:  After which He withdrew with our Domestics,
while at the request of the two Waiting-women, Marguerite conducted
them to the room designed for their Mistress.

The two new-comers were tall, stout, well-made young Men,
hard-featured, and very much sun-burnt.  They paid their compliments to
us in few words, and acknowledged Claude, who now entered the room, as
an old acquaintance.  They then threw aside their cloaks in which they
were wrapped up, took off a leathern belt to which a large Cutlass was
suspended, and each drawing a brace of pistols from his girdle laid
them upon a shelf.

'You travel well-armed,' said I.

'True, Monsieur;' replied Robert.  'We left Strasbourg late this
Evening, and 'tis necessary to take precautions at passing through this
Forest after dark.  It does not bear a good repute, I promise you.'

'How?' said the Baroness; 'Are there Robbers hereabout?'

'So it is said, Madame; For my own part, I have travelled through the
wood at all hours, and never met with one of them.'

Here Marguerite returned.  Her Stepsons drew her to the other end of
the room, and whispered her for some minutes.  By the looks which they
cast towards us at intervals, I conjectured them to be enquiring our
business in the Cottage.

In the meanwhile the Baroness expressed her apprehensions, that her
Husband would be suffering much anxiety upon her account. She had
intended to send on one of her Servants to inform the Baron of her
delay; But the account which the young Men gave of the Forest rendered
this plan impracticable.  Claude relieved her from her embarrassment.
He informed her that He was under the necessity of reaching Strasbourg
that night, and that would She trust him with a letter, She might
depend upon its being safely delivered.

'And how comes it,' said I, 'that you are under no apprehension of
meeting these Robbers?'

'Alas! Monsieur, a poor Man with a large family must not lose certain
profit because 'tis attended with a little danger, and perhaps my Lord
the Baron may give me a trifle for my pains. Besides, I have nothing to
lose except my life, and that will not be worth the Robbers taking.'

I thought his arguments bad, and advised his waiting till the Morning;
But as the Baroness did not second me, I was obliged to give up the
point.  The Baroness Lindenberg, as I found afterwards, had long been
accustomed to sacrifice the interests of others to her own, and her
wish to send Claude to Strasbourg blinded her to the danger of the
undertaking.  Accordingly, it was resolved that He should set out
without delay.  The Baroness wrote her letter to her Husband, and I
sent a few lines to my Banker, apprising him that I should not be at
Strasbourg till the next day.  Claude took our letters, and left the
Cottage.

The Lady declared herself much fatigued by her journey:  Besides having
come from some distance, the Drivers had contrived to lose their way in
the Forest.  She now addressed herself to Marguerite, desiring to be
shown to her chamber, and permitted to take half an hour's repose.  One
of the Waiting-women was immediately summoned; She appeared with a
light, and the Baroness followed her up stairs.  The cloth was
spreading in the chamber where I was, and Marguerite soon gave me to
understand that I was in her way.  Her hints were too broad to be
easily mistaken; I therefore desired one of the young Men to conduct me
to the chamber where I was to sleep, and where I could remain till
supper was ready.

'Which chamber is it, Mother?' said Robert.

'The One with green hangings,' She replied; 'I have just been at the
trouble of getting it ready, and have put fresh sheets upon the Bed; If
the Gentleman chooses to lollop and lounge upon it, He may make it
again himself for me.'

'You are out of humour, Mother, but that is no novelty.  Have the
goodness to follow me, Monsieur.'

He opened the door, and advanced towards a narrow staircase.

'You have got no light!' said Marguerite; 'Is it your own neck or the
Gentleman's that you have a mind to break?'

She crossed by me, and put a candle into Robert's hand, having received
which, He began to ascend the staircase.  Jacques was employed in
laying the cloth, and his back was turned towards me.

Marguerite seized the moment, when we were unobserved.  She caught my
hand, and pressed it strongly.

'Look at the Sheets!' said She as She passed me, and immediately
resumed her former occupation.

Startled by the abruptness of her action, I remained as if petrified.
Robert's voice, desiring me to follow him, recalled me to myself.  I
ascended the staircase.  My conductor ushered me into a chamber, where
an excellent wood-fire was blazing upon the hearth.  He placed the
light upon the Table, enquired whether I had any further commands, and
on my replying in the negative, He left me to myself.  You may be
certain that the moment when I found myself alone was that on which I
complied with Marguerite's injunction.  I took the candle, hastily
approached the Bed, and turned down the Coverture.  What was my
astonishment, my horror, at finding the sheets crimsoned with blood!

At that moment a thousand confused ideas passed before my imagination.
The Robbers who infested the Wood, Marguerite's exclamation respecting
her Children, the arms and appearance of the two young Men, and the
various Anecdotes which I had heard related, respecting the secret
correspondence which frequently exists between Banditti and
Postillions, all these circumstances flashed upon my mind, and inspired
me with doubt and apprehension.  I ruminated on the most probable means
of ascertaining the truth of my conjectures.  Suddenly I was aware of
Someone below pacing hastily backwards and forwards.  Every thing now
appeared to me an object of suspicion.  With precaution I drew near the
window, which, as the room had been long shut up, was left open in
spite of the cold.  I ventured to look out.  The beams of the Moon
permitted me to distinguish a Man, whom I had no difficulty to
recognize for my Host.  I watched his movements.

He walked swiftly, then stopped, and seemed to listen:  He stamped upon
the ground, and beat his stomach with his arms as if to guard himself
from the inclemency of the season.  At the least noise, if a voice was
heard in the lower part of the House, if a Bat flitted past him, or the
wind rattled amidst the leafless boughs, He started, and looked round
with anxiety.

'Plague take him!' said He at length with impatience; 'What can He be
about!'

He spoke in a low voice; but as He was just below my window, I had no
difficulty to distinguish his words.

I now heard the steps of one approaching.  Baptiste went towards the
sound; He joined a man, whom his low stature and the Horn suspended
from his neck, declared to be no other than my faithful Claude, whom I
had supposed to be already on his way to Strasbourg.  Expecting their
discourse to throw some light upon my situation, I hastened to put
myself in a condition to hear it with safety.  For this purpose I
extinguished the candle, which stood upon a table near the Bed:  The
flame of the fire was not strong enough to betray me, and I immediately
resumed my place at the window.

The objects of my curiosity had stationed themselves directly under it.
I suppose that during my momentary absence the Wood-man had been
blaming Claude for tardiness, since when I returned to the window, the
latter was endeavouring to excuse his fault.

'However,' added He, 'my diligence at present shall make up for my past
delay.'

'On that condition,' answered Baptiste, 'I shall readily forgive you.
But in truth as you share equally with us in our prizes, your own
interest will make you use all possible diligence. 'Twould be a shame
to let such a noble booty escape us!  You say, that this Spaniard is
rich?'

'His Servant boasted at the Inn, that the effects in his Chaise were
worth above two thousand Pistoles.'

Oh! how I cursed Stephano's imprudent vanity!

'And I have been told,' continued the Postillion, 'that this Baroness
carries about her a casket of jewels of immense value.'

'May be so, but I had rather She had stayed away.  The Spaniard was a
secure prey.  The Boys and myself could easily have mastered him and
his Servant, and then the two thousand Pistoles would have been shared
between us four.  Now we must let in the Band for a share, and perhaps
the whole Covey may escape us. Should our Friends have betaken
themselves to their different posts before you reach the Cavern, all
will be lost.  The Lady's Attendants are too numerous for us to
overpower them:  Unless our Associates arrive in time, we must needs
let these Travellers set out tomorrow without damage or hurt.'

''Tis plaguy unlucky that my Comrades who drove the Coach should be
those unacquainted with our Confederacy!  But never fear, Friend
Baptiste.  An hour will bring me to the Cavern; It is now but ten
o'clock, and by twelve you may expect the arrival of the Band.  By the
bye, take care of your Wife:  You know how strong is her repugnance to
our mode of life, and She may find means to give information to the
Lady's Servants of our design.'

'Oh! I am secure of her silence; She is too much afraid of me, and fond
of her children, to dare to betray my secret.  Besides, Jacques and
Robert keep a strict eye over her, and She is not permitted to set a
foot out of the Cottage.  The Servants are safely lodged in the Barn; I
shall endeavour to keep all quiet till the arrival of our Friends.
Were I assured of your finding them, the Strangers should be dispatched
this instant; But as it is possible for you to miss the Banditti, I am
fearful of being summoned to produce them by their Domestics in the
Morning.'

'And suppose either of the Travellers should discover your design?'

'Then we must poignard those in our power, and take our chance about
mastering the rest.  However, to avoid running such a risque, hasten to
the Cavern:  The Banditti never leave it before eleven, and if you use
diligence, you may reach it in time to stop them.'

'Tell Robert that I have taken his Horse:  My own has broken his
bridle, and escaped into the Wood.  What is the watch-word?'

'The reward of Courage.'

''Tis sufficient.  I hasten to the Cavern.'

'And I to rejoin my Guests, lest my absence should create suspicion.
Farewell, and be diligent.'

These worthy Associates now separated:  The One bent his course towards
the Stable, while the Other returned to the House.

You may judge, what must have been my feelings during this
conversation, of which I lost not a single syllable.  I dared not trust
myself to my reflections, nor did any means present itself to escape
the dangers which threatened me.  Resistance, I knew to be vain; I was
unarmed, and a single Man against Three:  However, I resolved at least
to sell my life as dearly as I could. Dreading lest Baptiste should
perceive my absence, and suspect me to have overheard the message with
which Claude was dispatched, I hastily relighted my candle and quitted
the chamber.  On descending, I found the Table spread for six Persons.
The Baroness sat by the fireside: Marguerite was employed in dressing a
sallad, and her Step-sons were whispering together at the further end
of the room.  Baptiste having the round of the Garden to make, ere He
could reach the Cottage door, was not yet arrived.  I seated myself
quietly opposite to the Baroness.

A glance upon Marguerite told her that her hint had not been thrown
away upon me.  How different did She now appear to me! What before
seemed gloom and sullenness, I now found to be disgust at her
Associates, and compassion for my danger.  I looked up to her as to my
only resource; Yet knowing her to be watched by her Husband with a
suspicious eye, I could place but little reliance on the exertions of
her good-will.

In spite of all my endeavours to conceal it, my agitation was but too
visibly expressed upon my countenance. I was pale, and both my words
and actions were disordered and embarrassed.  The young Men observed
this, and enquired the cause.  I attributed it to excess of fatigue,
and the violent effect produced on me by the severity of the season.
Whether they believed me or not, I will not pretend to say:  They at
least ceased to embarrass me with their questions.  I strove to divert
my attention from the perils which surrounded me, by conversing on
different subjects with the Baroness.  I talked of Germany, declaring
my intention of visiting it immediately:  God knows, that I little
thought at that moment of ever seeing it!  She replied to me with great
ease and politeness, professed that the pleasure of making my
acquaintance amply compensated for the delay in her journey, and gave
me a pressing invitation to make some stay at the Castle of Lindenberg.
As She spoke thus, the Youths exchanged a malicious smile, which
declared that She would be fortunate if She ever reached that Castle
herself.  This action did not escape me; But I concealed the emotion
which it excited in my breast.  I continued to converse with the Lady;
But my discourse was so frequently incoherent, that as She has since
informed me, She began to doubt whether I was in my right senses.  The
fact was, that while my conversation turned upon one subject, my
thoughts were entirely occupied by another.  I meditated upon the means
of quitting the Cottage, finding my way to the Barn, and giving the
Domestics information of our Host's designs.  I was soon convinced, how
impracticable was the attempt.  Jacques and Robert watched my every
movement with an attentive eye, and I was obliged to abandon the idea.
All my hopes now rested upon Claude's not finding the Banditti:  In
that case, according to what I had overheard, we should be permitted to
depart unhurt.

I shuddered involuntarily as Baptiste entered the room.  He made many
apologies for his long absence, but 'He had been detained by affairs
impossible to be delayed.'  He then entreated permission for his family
to sup at the same table with us, without which, respect would not
authorize his taking such a liberty.  Oh! how in my heart I cursed the
Hypocrite!  How I loathed his presence, who was on the point of
depriving me of an existence, at that time infinitely dear!  I had
every reason to be satisfied with life; I had youth, wealth, rank, and
education; and the fairest prospects presented themselves before me.  I
saw those prospects on the point of closing in the most horrible
manner:  Yet was I obliged to dissimulate, and to receive with a
semblance of gratitude the false civilities of him who held the dagger
to my bosom.

The permission which our Host demanded, was easily obtained.  We seated
ourselves at the Table.  The Baroness and myself occupied one side:
The Sons were opposite to us with their backs to the door.  Baptiste
took his seat by the Baroness at the upper end, and the place next to
him was left for his Wife.  She soon entered the room, and placed
before us a plain but comfortable Peasant's repast.  Our Host thought
it necessary to apologize for the poorness of the supper:  'He had not
been apprized of our coming; He could only offer us such fare as had
been intended for his own family:'

'But,' added He, 'should any accident detain my noble Guests longer
than they at present intend, I hope to give them a better treatment.'

The Villain! I well knew the accident to which He alluded; I shuddered
at the treatment which He taught us to expect!

My Companion in danger seemed entirely to have got rid of her chagrin
at being delayed.  She laughed, and conversed with the family with
infinite gaiety.  I strove but in vain to follow her example.  My
spirits were evidently forced, and the constraint which I put upon
myself escaped not Baptiste's observation.

'Come, come, Monsieur, cheer up!' said He; 'You seem not quite
recovered from your fatigue.  To raise your spirits, what say you to a
glass of excellent old wine which was left me by my Father? God rest
his soul, He is in a better world!  I seldom produce this wine; But as
I am not honoured with such Guests every day, this is an occasion which
deserves a Bottle.'

He then gave his Wife a Key, and instructed her where to find the wine
of which He spoke.  She seemed by no means pleased with the commission;
She took the Key with an embarrassed air, and hesitated to quit the
Table.

'Did you hear me?' said Baptiste in an angry tone.

Marguerite darted upon him a look of mingled anger and fear, and left
the chamber.  His eyes followed her suspiciously, till She had closed
the door.

She soon returned with a bottle sealed with yellow wax.  She placed it
upon the table, and gave the Key back to her Husband. I suspected that
this liquor was not presented to us without design, and I watched
Marguerite's movements with inquietude. She was employed in rinsing
some small horn Goblets.  As She placed them before Baptiste, She saw
that my eye was fixed upon her; and at the moment when She thought
herself unobserved by the Banditti, She motioned to me with her head
not to taste the liquor, She then resumed her place.

In the mean while our Host had drawn the Cork, and filling two of the
Goblets, offered them to the Lady and myself.  She at first made some
objections, but the instances of Baptiste were so urgent, that She was
obliged to comply.  Fearing to excite suspicion, I hesitated not to
take the Goblet presented to me. By its smell and colour I guessed it
to be Champagne; But some grains of powder floating upon the top
convinced me that it was not unadulterated.  However, I dared not to
express my repugnance to drinking it; I lifted it to my lips, and
seemed to be swallowing it:  Suddenly starting from my chair, I made
the best of my way towards a Vase of water at some distance, in which
Marguerite had been rinsing the Goblets.  I pretended to spit out the
wine with disgust, and took an opportunity unperceived of emptying the
liquor into the Vase.

The Banditti seemed alarmed at my action.  Jacques half rose from his
chair, put his hand into his bosom, and I discovered the haft of a
dagger.  I returned to my seat with tranquillity, and affected not to
have observed their confusion.

'You have not suited my taste, honest Friend,' said I, addressing
myself to Baptiste.  'I never can drink Champagne without its producing
a violent illness.  I swallowed a few mouthfuls ere I was aware of its
quality, and fear that I shall suffer for my imprudence.'

Baptiste and Jacques exchanged looks of distrust.

'Perhaps,' said Robert, 'the smell may be disagreeable to you.'

He quitted his chair, and removed the Goblet.  I observed, that He
examined, whether it was nearly empty.

'He must have drank sufficient,' said He to his Brother in a low voice,
while He reseated himself.

Marguerite looked apprehensive, that I had tasted the liquor:  A glance
from my eye reassured her.

I waited with anxiety for the effects which the Beverage would produce
upon the Lady.  I doubted not but the grains which I had observed were
poisonous, and lamented that it had been impossible for me to warn her
of the danger.  But a few minutes had elapsed before I perceived her
eyes grow heavy; Her head sank upon her shoulder, and She fell into a
deep sleep.  I affected not to attend to this circumstance, and
continued my conversation with Baptiste, with all the outward gaiety in
my power to assume.  But He no longer answered me without constraint.
He eyed me with distrust and astonishment, and I saw that the Banditti
were frequently whispering among themselves. My situation became every
moment more painful; I sustained the character of confidence with a
worse grace than ever.  Equally afraid of the arrival of their
Accomplices and of their suspecting my knowledge of their designs, I
knew not how to dissipate the distrust which the Banditti evidently
entertained for me.  In this new dilemma the friendly Marguerite again
assisted me.  She passed behind the Chairs of her Stepsons, stopped for
a moment opposite to me, closed her eyes, and reclined her head upon
her shoulder.  This hint immediately dispelled my incertitude.  It told
me, that I ought to imitate the Baroness, and pretend that the liquor
had taken its full effect upon me.  I did so, and in a few minutes
seemed perfectly overcome with slumber.

'So!' cried Baptiste, as I fell back in my chair; 'At last He sleeps!
I began to think that He had scented our design, and that we should
have been forced to dispatch him at all events.'

'And why not dispatch him at all events?' enquired the ferocious
Jacques.  'Why leave him the possibility of betraying our secret?
Marguerite, give me one of my Pistols:  A single touch of the trigger
will finish him at once.'

'And supposing,' rejoined the Father, 'Supposing that our Friends
should not arrive tonight, a pretty figure we should make when the
Servants enquire for him in the Morning!  No, no, Jacques; We must wait
for our Associates.  If they join us, we are strong enough to dispatch
the Domestics as well as their Masters, and the booty is our own; If
Claude does not find the Troop, we must take patience, and suffer the
prey to slip through our fingers. Ah! Boys, Boys, had you arrived but
five minutes sooner, the Spaniard would have been done for, and two
thousand Pistoles our own.  But you are always out of the way when you
are most wanted.

You are the most unlucky Rogues!'

'Well, well, Father!' answered Jacques; 'Had you been of my mind, all
would have been over by this time. You, Robert, Claude, and myself, why
the Strangers were but double the number, and I warrant you we might
have mastered them.  However, Claude is gone; 'Tis too late to think of
it now.  We must wait patiently for the arrival of the Gang; and if the
Travellers escape us tonight, we must take care to waylay them
tomorrow.'

'True!  True!' said Baptiste; 'Marguerite, have you given the
sleeping-draught to the Waiting-women?'

She replied in the affirmative.

'All then is safe.  Come, come, Boys; Whatever falls out, we have no
reason to complain of this adventure. We run no danger, may gain much,
and can lose nothing.'

At this moment I heard a trampling of Horses.  Oh! how dreadful was the
sound to my ears.  A cold sweat flowed down my forehead, and I felt all
the terrors of impending death.  I was by no means reassured by hearing
the compassionate Marguerite exclaim in the accents of despair,

'Almighty God! They are lost!'

Luckily the Wood-man and his Sons were too much occupied by the arrival
of their Associates to attend to me, or the violence of my agitation
would have convinced them that my sleep was feigned.

'Open!  Open!' exclaimed several voices on the outside of the Cottage.

'Yes!  Yes!' cried Baptiste joyfully; 'They are our Friends sure
enough!  Now then our booty is certain.  Away! Lads, Away!  Lead them
to the Barn; You know what is to be done there.'

Robert hastened to open the door of the Cottage.

'But first,' said Jacques, taking up his arms; 'first let me dispatch
these Sleepers.'

'No, no, no!' replied his Father; 'Go you to the Barn, where your
presence is wanted.  Leave me to take care of these and the Women
above.'

Jacques obeyed, and followed his Brother.  They seemed to converse with
the New-Comers for a few minutes:  After which I heard the Robbers
dismount, and as I conjectured, bend their course towards the Barn.

'So! That is wisely done!' muttered Baptiste; 'They have quitted their
Horses, that They may fall upon the Strangers by surprise. Good! Good!
and now to business.'

I heard him approach a small Cupboard which was fixed up in a distant
part of the room, and unlock it.  At this moment I felt myself shaken
gently.

'Now! Now!' whispered Marguerite.

I opened my eyes.  Baptiste stood with his back towards me.  No one
else was in the room save Marguerite and the sleeping Lady. The Villain
had taken a dagger from the Cupboard and seemed examining whether it
was sufficiently sharp.  I had neglected to furnish myself with arms;
But I perceived this to be my only chance of escaping, and resolved not
to lose the opportunity.  I sprang from my seat, darted suddenly upon
Baptiste, and clasping my hands round his throat, pressed it so
forcibly as to prevent his uttering a single cry.  You may remember
that I was remarkable at Salamanca for the power of my arm:  It now
rendered me an essential service.  Surprised, terrified, and
breathless, the Villain was by no means an equal Antagonist.  I threw
him upon the ground; I grasped him still tighter; and while I fixed him
without motion upon the floor, Marguerite, wresting the dagger from his
hand, plunged it repeatedly in his heart till He expired.

No sooner was this horrible but necessary act perpetrated than
Marguerite called on me to follow her.

'Flight is our only refuge!' said She; 'Quick! Quick! Away!'

I hesitated not to obey her: but unwilling to leave the Baroness a
victim to the vengeance of the Robbers, I raised her in my arms still
sleeping, and hastened after Marguerite.  The Horses of the Banditti
were fastened near the door:  My Conductress sprang upon one of them.
I followed her example, placed the Baroness before me, and spurred on
my Horse.  Our only hope was to reach Strasbourg, which was much nearer
than the perfidious Claude had assured me.  Marguerite was well
acquainted with the road, and galloped on before me.  We were obliged
to pass by the Barn, where the Robbers were slaughtering our Domestics.
The door was open:  We distinguished the shrieks of the dying and
imprecations of the Murderers!  What I felt at that moment language is
unable to describe!

Jacques heard the trampling of our Horses as we rushed by the Barn.  He
flew to the Door with a burning Torch in his hand, and easily
recognised the Fugitives.

'Betrayed! Betrayed!' He shouted to his Companions.

Instantly they left their bloody work, and hastened to regain their
Horses.  We heard no more.  I buried my spurs in the sides of my
Courser, and Marguerite goaded on hers with the poignard, which had
already rendered us such good service.  We flew like lightning, and
gained the open plains.  Already was Strasbourg's Steeple in sight,
when we heard the Robbers pursuing us. Marguerite looked back, and
distinguished our followers descending a small Hill at no great
distance.  It was in vain that we urged on our Horses; The noise
approached nearer with every moment.

'We are lost!' She exclaimed; 'The Villains gain upon us!'

'On! On!' replied I; 'I hear the trampling of Horses coming from the
Town.'

We redoubled our exertions, and were soon aware of a numerous band of
Cavaliers, who came towards us at full speed.  They were on the point
of passing us.

'Stay!  Stay!' shrieked Marguerite; 'Save us!  For God's sake, save us!'

The Foremost, who seemed to act as Guide, immediately reined in his
Steed.

''Tis She! 'Tis She!' exclaimed He, springing upon the ground; 'Stop,
my Lord, stop! They are safe! 'Tis my Mother!'

At the same moment Marguerite threw herself from her Horse, clasped him
in her arms, and covered him with Kisses.  The other Cavaliers stopped
at the exclamation.

'The Baroness Lindenberg?' cried another of the Strangers eagerly;
'Where is She?  Is She not with you?'

He stopped on beholding her lying senseless in my arms.  Hastily He
caught her from me.  The profound sleep in which She was plunged made
him at first tremble for her life; but the beating of her heart soon
reassured him.

'God be thanked!' said He; 'She has escaped unhurt.'

I interrupted his joy by pointing out the Brigands, who continued to
approach.  No sooner had I mentioned them than the greatest part of the
Company, which appeared to be chiefly composed of soldiers, hastened
forward to meet them.  The Villains stayed not to receive their attack:
Perceiving their danger they turned the heads of their Horses, and fled
into the wood, whither they were followed by our Preservers.  In the
mean while the Stranger, whom I guessed to be the Baron Lindenberg,
after thanking me for my care of his Lady, proposed our returning with
all speed to the Town.  The Baroness, on whom the effects of the opiate
had not ceased to operate, was placed before him; Marguerite and her
Son remounted their Horses; the Baron's Domestics followed, and we soon
arrived at the Inn, where He had taken his apartments.

This was at the Austrian Eagle, where my Banker, whom before my
quitting Paris I had apprised of my intention to visit Strasbourg, had
prepared Lodgings for me.  I rejoiced at this circumstance.  It gave me
an opportunity of cultivating the Baron's acquaintance, which I foresaw
would be of use to me in Germany.  Immediately upon our arrival the
Lady was conveyed to bed; A Physician was sent for, who prescribed a
medicine likely to counteract the effects of the sleepy potion, and
after it had been poured down her throat, She was committed to the care
of the Hostess.  The Baron then addressed himself to me, and entreated
me to recount the particulars of this adventure.  I complied with his
request instantaneously; for in pain respecting Stephano's fate, whom I
had been compelled to abandon to the cruelty of the Banditti, I found
it impossible for me to repose, till I had some news of him.  I
received but too soon the intelligence, that my trusty Servant had
perished.  The Soldiers who had pursued the Brigands returned while I
was employed in relating my adventure to the Baron. By their account I
found that the Robbers had been overtaken:  Guilt and true courage are
incompatible; They had thrown themselves at the feet of their Pursuers,
had surrendered themselves without striking a blow, had discovered
their secret retreat, made known their signals by which the rest of the
Gang might be seized, and in short had betrayed ever mark of cowardice
and baseness.  By this means the whole of the Band, consisting of near
sixty persons, had been made Prisoners, bound, and conducted to
Strasbourg.  Some of the Soldiers hastened to the Cottage, One of the
Banditti serving them as Guide.  Their first visit was to the fatal
Barn, where they were fortunate enough to find two of the Baron's
Servants still alive, though desperately wounded. The rest had expired
beneath the swords of the Robbers, and of these my unhappy Stephano was
one.

Alarmed at our escape, the Robbers in their haste to overtake us, had
neglected to visit the Cottage.  In consequence, the Soldiers found the
two Waiting-women unhurt, and buried in the same death-like slumber
which had overpowered their Mistress. There was nobody else found in
the Cottage, except a child not above four years old, which the
Soldiers brought away with them. We were busying ourselves with
conjectures respecting the birth of this little unfortunate, when
Marguerite rushed into the room with the Baby in her arms.  She fell at
the feet of the Officer who was making us this report, and blessed him
a thousand times for the preservation of her Child.

When the first burst of maternal tenderness was over, I besought her to
declare, by what means She had been united to a Man whose principles
seemed so totally discordant with her own.  She bent her eyes
downwards, and wiped a few tears from her cheek.

'Gentlemen,' said She after a silence of some minutes, 'I would request
a favour of you:  You have a right to know on whom you confer an
obligation.  I will not therefore stifle a confession which covers me
with shame; But permit me to comprise it in as few words as possible.

'I was born in Strasbourg of respectable Parents; Their names I must at
present conceal:  My Father still lives, and deserves not to be
involved in my infamy; If you grant my request, you shall be informed
of my family name.  A Villain made himself Master of my affections, and
to follow him I quitted my Father's House. Yet though my passions
overpowered my virtue, I sank not into that degeneracy of vice, but too
commonly the lot of Women who make the first false step.  I loved my
Seducer; dearly loved him! I was true to his Bed; this Baby, and the
Youth who warned you, my Lord Baron, of your Lady's danger, are the
pledges of our affection.  Even at this moment I lament his loss,
though 'tis to him that I owe all the miseries of my existence.

'He was of noble birth, but He had squandered away his paternal
inheritance.  His Relations considered him as a disgrace to their name,
and utterly discarded him.  His excesses drew upon him the indignation
of the Police.  He was obliged to fly from Strasbourg, and saw no other
resource from beggary than an union with the Banditti who infested the
neighbouring Forest, and whose Troop was chiefly composed of Young Men
of family in the same predicament with himself.  I was determined not
to forsake him.  I followed him to the Cavern of the Brigands, and
shared with him the misery inseparable from a life of pillage.  But
though I was aware that our existence was supported by plunder, I knew
not all the horrible circumstances attached to my Lover's profession.
These He concealed from me with the utmost care; He was conscious that
my sentiments were not sufficiently depraved to look without horror
upon assassination:  He supposed, and with justice, that I should fly
with detestation from the embraces of a Murderer.  Eight years of
possession had not abated his love for me; and He cautiously removed
from my knowledge every circumstance, which might lead me to suspect
the crimes in which He but too often participated. He succeeded
perfectly:  It was not till after my Seducer's death, that I discovered
his hands to have been stained with the blood of innocence.

'One fatal night He was brought back to the Cavern covered with wounds:
He received them in attacking an English Traveller, whom his Companions
immediately sacrificed to their resentment.  He had only time to
entreat my pardon for all the sorrows which He had caused me:  He
pressed my hand to his lips, and expired.  My grief was inexpressible.
As soon as its violence abated, I resolved to return to Strasbourg, to
throw myself with my two Children at my Father's feet, and implore his
forgiveness, though I little hoped to obtain it.  What was my
consternation when informed that no one entrusted with the secret of
their retreat was ever permitted to quit the troop of the Banditti;
That I must give up all hopes of ever rejoining society, and consent
instantly to accepting one of their Band for my Husband!  My prayers
and remonstrances were vain.  They cast lots to decide to whose
possession I should fall; I became the property of the infamous
Baptiste.  A Robber, who had once been a Monk, pronounced over us a
burlesque rather than a religious Ceremony: I and my Children were
delivered into the hands of my new Husband, and He conveyed us
immediately to his home.

'He assured me that He had long entertained for me the most ardent
regard; But that Friendship for my deceased Lover had obliged him to
stifle his desires.  He endeavoured to reconcile me to my fate, and for
some time treated me with respect and gentleness:  At length finding
that my aversion rather increased than diminished, He obtained those
favours by violence, which I persisted to refuse him.  No resource
remained for me but to bear my sorrows with patience; I was conscious
that I deserved them but too well.  Flight was forbidden: My Children
were in the power of Baptiste, and He had sworn that if I attempted to
escape, their lives should pay for it.  I had had too many
opportunities of witnessing the barbarity of his nature to doubt his
fulfilling his oath to the very letter.  Sad experience had convinced
me of the horrors of my situation:  My first Lover had carefully
concealed them from me; Baptiste rather rejoiced in opening my eyes to
the cruelties of his profession, and strove to familiarise me with
blood and slaughter.

'My nature was licentious and warm, but not cruel: My conduct had been
imprudent, but my heart was not unprincipled.  Judge then what I must
have felt at being a continual witness of crimes the most horrible and
revolting!  Judge how I must have grieved at being united to a Man who
received the unsuspecting Guest with an air of openness and
hospitality, at the very moment that He meditated his destruction.
Chagrin and discontent preyed upon my constitution:  The few charms
bestowed on me by nature withered away, and the dejection of my
countenance denoted the sufferings of my heart.  I was tempted a
thousand times to put an end to my existence; But the remembrance of my
Children held my hand.  I trembled to leave my dear Boys in my Tyrant's
power, and trembled yet more for their virtue than their lives.  The
Second was still too young to benefit by my instructions; But in the
heart of my Eldest I laboured unceasingly to plant those principles,
which might enable him to avoid the crimes of his Parents.  He listened
to me with docility, or rather with eagerness.  Even at his early age,
He showed that He was not calculated for the society of Villains; and
the only comfort which I enjoyed among my sorrows, was to witness the
dawning virtues of my Theodore.

'Such was my situation, when the perfidy of Don Alphonso's postillion
conducted him to the Cottage.  His youth, air, and manners interested
me most forcibly in his behalf.  The absence of my Husband's Sons gave
me an opportunity which I had long wished to find, and I resolved to
risque every thing to preserve the Stranger.  The vigilance of Baptiste
prevented me from warning Don Alphonso of his danger:  I knew that my
betraying the secret would be immediately punished with death; and
however embittered was my life by calamities, I wanted courage to
sacrifice it for the sake of preserving that of another Person. My only
hope rested upon procuring succour from Strasbourg:  At this I resolved
to try; and should an opportunity offer of warning Don Alphonso of his
danger unobserved, I was determined to seize it with avidity.  By
Baptiste's orders I went upstairs to make the Stranger's Bed:  I spread
upon it Sheets in which a Traveller had been murdered but a few nights
before, and which still were stained with blood.  I hoped that these
marks would not escape the vigilance of our Guest, and that He would
collect from them the designs of my perfidious Husband.  Neither was
this the only step which I took to preserve the Stranger.  Theodore was
confined to his bed by illness.  I stole into his room unobserved by my
Tyrant, communicated to him my project, and He entered into it with
eagerness.  He rose in spite of his malady, and dressed himself with
all speed.  I fastened one of the Sheets round his arms, and lowered
him from the Window.  He flew to the Stable, took Claude's Horse, and
hastened to Strasbourg.  Had He been accosted by the Banditti, He was
to have declared himself sent upon a message by Baptiste, but
fortunately He reached the Town without meeting any obstacle.
Immediately upon his arrival at Strasbourg, He entreated assistance
from the Magistrature: His Story passed from mouth to mouth, and at
length came to the knowledge of my Lord the Baron.  Anxious for the
safety of his Lady, whom He knew would be upon the road that Evening,
it struck him that She might have fallen into the power of the Robbers.
He accompanied Theodore who guided the Soldiers towards the Cottage,
and arrived just in time to save us from falling once more into the
hands of our Enemies.'

Here I interrupted Marguerite to enquire why the sleepy potion had been
presented to me.  She said that Baptiste supposed me to have arms about
me, and wished to incapacitate me from making resistance:  It was a
precaution which He always took, since as the Travellers had no hopes
of escaping, Despair would have incited them to sell their lives dearly.

The Baron then desired Marguerite to inform him, what were her present
plans.  I joined him in declaring my readiness to show my gratitude to
her for the preservation of my life.

'Disgusted with a world,' She replied, 'in which I have met with
nothing but misfortunes, my only wish is to retire into a Convent.  But
first I must provide for my Children.  I find that my Mother is no
more, probably driven to an untimely grave by my desertion!  My Father
is still living; He is not an hard Man; Perhaps, Gentlemen, in spite of
my ingratitude and imprudence, your intercessions may induce him to
forgive me, and to take charge of his unfortunate Grand-sons.  If you
obtain this boon for me, you will repay my services a thousand-fold!'

Both the Baron and myself assured Marguerite, that we would spare no
pains to obtain her pardon: and that even should her Father be
inflexible, She need be under no apprehensions respecting the fate of
her Children.  I engaged myself to provide for Theodore, and the Baron
promised to take the youngest under his protection.

The grateful Mother thanked us with tears for what She called
generosity, but which in fact was no more than a proper sense of our
obligations to her.  She then left the room to put her little Boy to
bed, whom fatigue and sleep had compleatly overpowered.

The Baroness, on recovering and being informed from what dangers I had
rescued her, set no bounds to the expressions of her gratitude.  She
was joined so warmly by her Husband in pressing me to accompany them to
their Castle in Bavaria, that I found it impossible to resist their
entreaties.  During a week which we passed at Strasbourg, the interests
of Marguerite were not forgotten: In our application to her Father we
succeeded as amply as we could wish.  The good old Man had lost his
Wife:  He had no Children but this unfortunate Daughter, of whom He had
received no news for almost fourteen years.  He was surrounded by
distant Relations, who waited with impatience for his decease in order
to get possession of his money.  When therefore Marguerite appeared
again so unexpectedly, He considered her as a gift from heaven: He
received her and her Children with open arms, and insisted upon their
establishing themselves in his House without delay. The disappointed
Cousins were obliged to give place.  The old Man would not hear of his
Daughter's retiring into a Convent: He said that She was too necessary
to his happiness, and She was easily persuaded to relinquish her
design.  But no persuasions could induce Theodore to give up the plan
which I had at first marked out for him.  He had attached himself to me
most sincerely during my stay at Strasbourg; and when I was on the
point of leaving it, He besought me with tears to take him into my
service: He set forth all his little talents in the most favourable
colours, and tried to convince me that I should find him of infinite
use to me upon the road.  I was unwilling to charge myself with a Lad
but scarcely turned of thirteen, whom I knew could only be a burthen to
me:  However, I could not resist the entreaties of this affectionate
Youth, who in fact possessed a thousand estimable qualities.  With some
difficulty He persuaded his relations to let him follow me, and that
permission once obtained, He was dubbed with the title of my Page.
Having passed a week at Strasbourg, Theodore and myself set out for
Bavaria in company with the Baron and his Lady.  These Latter as well
as myself had forced Marguerite to accept several presents of value,
both for herself, and her youngest Son:  On leaving her, I promised his
Mother faithfully that I would restore Theodore to her within the year.

I have related this adventure at length, Lorenzo, that you might
understand the means by which 'The Adventurer, Alphonso d'Alvarada got
introduced into the Castle of Lindenberg.'  Judge from this specimen
how much faith should be given to your Aunt's assertions!



VOLUME II