II

  While in each other's arms entranced They lay,
  They blessed the night, and curst the coming day.
                                            Lee.

The burst of transport was past:  Ambrosio's lust was satisfied;
Pleasure fled, and Shame usurped her seat in his bosom.  Confused and
terrified at his weakness, He drew himself from Matilda's arms.  His
perjury presented itself before him:  He reflected on the scene which
had just been acted, and trembled at the consequences of a discovery.
He looked forward with horror; His heart was despondent, and became the
abode of satiety and disgust.  He avoided the eyes of his Partner in
frailty; A melancholy silence prevailed, during which Both seemed
busied with disagreeable reflections.

Matilda was the first to break it.  She took his hand gently, and
pressed it to her burning lips.

'Ambrosio!'  She murmured in a soft and trembling voice.

The Abbot started at the sound.  He turned his eyes upon Matilda's:
They were filled with tears; Her cheeks were covered with blushes, and
her supplicating looks seemed to solicit his compassion.

'Dangerous Woman!' said He; 'Into what an abyss of misery have you
plunged me!  Should your sex be discovered, my honour, nay my life,
must pay for the pleasure of a few moments.  Fool that I was, to trust
myself to your seductions!  What can now be done? How can my offence be
expiated?  What atonement can purchase the pardon of my crime?
Wretched Matilda, you have destroyed my quiet for ever!'

'To me these reproaches, Ambrosio?  To me, who have sacrificed for you
the world's pleasures, the luxury of wealth, the delicacy of sex, my
Friends, my fortune, and my fame?  What have you lost, which I
preserved?  Have _I_ not shared in YOUR guilt?  Have YOU not shared in
MY pleasure?  Guilt, did I say?  In what consists ours, unless in the
opinion of an ill-judging World?  Let that World be ignorant of them,
and our joys become divine and blameless!  Unnatural were your vows of
Celibacy; Man was not created for such a state; And were Love a crime,
God never would have made it so sweet, so irresistible!  Then banish
those clouds from your brow, my Ambrosio!  Indulge in those pleasures
freely, without which life is a worthless gift:  Cease to reproach me
with having taught you what is bliss, and feel equal transports with
the Woman who adores you!'

As She spoke, her eyes were filled with a delicious languor.  Her bosom
panted:  She twined her arms voluptuously round him, drew him towards
her, and glewed her lips to his.  Ambrosio again raged with desire:
The die was thrown:  His vows were already broken; He had already
committed the crime, and why should He refrain from enjoying its
reward?  He clasped her to his breast with redoubled ardour.  No longer
repressed by the sense of shame, He gave a loose to his intemperate
appetites.  While the fair Wanton put every invention of lust in
practice, every refinement in the art of pleasure which might heighten
the bliss of her possession, and render her Lover's transports still
more exquisite, Ambrosio rioted in delights till then unknown to him:
Swift fled the night, and the Morning blushed to behold him still
clasped in the embraces of Matilda.

Intoxicated with pleasure, the Monk rose from the Syren's luxurious
Couch.  He no longer reflected with shame upon his incontinence, or
dreaded the vengeance of offended heaven.  His only fear was lest Death
should rob him of enjoyments, for which his long Fast had only given a
keener edge to his appetite. Matilda was still under the influence of
poison, and the voluptuous Monk trembled less for his Preserver's life
than his Concubine's.  Deprived of her, He would not easily find
another Mistress with whom He could indulge his passions so fully, and
so safely.  He therefore pressed her with earnestness to use the means
of preservation which She had declared to be in her possession.

'Yes!' replied Matilda; 'Since you have made me feel that Life is
valuable, I will rescue mine at any rate.  No dangers shall appall me:
I will look upon the consequences of my action boldly, nor shudder at
the horrors which they present.  I will think my sacrifice scarcely
worthy to purchase your possession, and remember that a moment past in
your arms in this world o'er-pays an age of punishment in the next.
But before I take this step, Ambrosio, give me your solemn oath never
to enquire by what means I shall preserve myself.'

He did so in a manner the most binding.

'I thank you, my Beloved.  This precaution is necessary, for though you
know it not, you are under the command of vulgar prejudices:  The
Business on which I must be employed this night, might startle you from
its singularity, and lower me in your opinion.  Tell me; Are you
possessed of the Key of the low door on the western side of the Garden?'

'The Door which opens into the burying-ground common to us and the
Sisterhood of St. Clare?  I have not the Key, but can easily procure
it.'

'You have only this to do.  Admit me into the burying-ground at
midnight; Watch while I descend into the vaults of St. Clare, lest some
prying eye should observe my actions; Leave me there alone for an hour,
and that life is safe which I dedicate to your pleasures.  To prevent
creating suspicion, do not visit me during the day. Remember the Key,
and that I expect you before twelve.  Hark!  I hear steps approaching!
Leave me; I will pretend to sleep.'

The Friar obeyed, and left the Cell.  As He opened the door, Father
Pablos made his appearance.

'I come,' said the Latter, 'to enquire after the health of my young
Patient.'

'Hush!' replied Ambrosio, laying his finger upon his lip; 'Speak
softly; I am just come from him.  He has fallen into a profound
slumber, which doubtless will be of service to him.  Do not disturb him
at present, for He wishes to repose.'

Father Pablos obeyed, and hearing the Bell ring, accompanied the Abbot
to Matins.  Ambrosio felt embarrassed as He entered the Chapel.  Guilt
was new to him, and He fancied that every eye could read the
transactions of the night upon his countenance. He strove to pray; His
bosom no longer glowed with devotion; His thoughts insensibly wandered
to Matilda's secret charms.  But what He wanted in purity of heart, He
supplied by exterior sanctity.  The better to cloak his transgression,
He redoubled his pretensions to the semblance of virtue, and never
appeared more devoted to Heaven as since He had broken through his
engagements.  Thus did He unconsciously add Hypocrisy to perjury and
incontinence; He had fallen into the latter errors from yielding to
seduction almost irresistible; But he was now guilty of a voluntary
fault by endeavouring to conceal those into which Another had betrayed
him.

The Matins concluded, Ambrosio retired to his Cell.  The pleasures
which He had just tasted for the first time were still impressed upon
his mind.  His brain was bewildered, and presented a confused Chaos of
remorse, voluptuousness, inquietude, and fear.  He looked back with
regret to that peace of soul, that security of virtue, which till then
had been his portion.  He had indulged in excesses whose very idea but
four and twenty hours before He had recoiled at with horror.  He
shuddered at reflecting that a trifling indiscretion on his part, or on
Matilda's, would overturn that fabric of reputation which it had cost
him thirty years to erect, and render him the abhorrence of that People
of whom He was then the Idol.  Conscience painted to him in glaring
colours his perjury and weakness; Apprehension magnified to him the
horrors of punishment, and He already fancied himself in the prisons of
the Inquisition.  To these tormenting ideas succeeded Matilda's beauty,
and those delicious lessons which, once learnt, can never be forgotten.
A single glance thrown upon these reconciled him with himself.  He
considered the pleasures of the former night to have been purchased at
an easy price by the sacrifice of innocence and honour.  Their very
remembrance filled his soul with ecstacy; He cursed his foolish vanity,
which had induced him to waste in obscurity the bloom of life, ignorant
of the blessings of Love and Woman.  He determined at all events to
continue his commerce with Matilda, and called every argument to his
aid which might confirm his resolution. He asked himself, provided his
irregularity was unknown, in what would his fault consist, and what
consequences He had to apprehend?  By adhering strictly to every rule
of his order save Chastity, He doubted not to retain the esteem of Men,
and even the protection of heaven.  He trusted easily to be forgiven so
slight and natural a deviation from his vows:  But He forgot that
having pronounced those vows, Incontinence, in Laymen the most venial
of errors, became in his person the most heinous of crimes.

Once decided upon his future conduct, his mind became more easy. He
threw himself upon his bed, and strove by sleeping to recruit his
strength exhausted by his nocturnal excesses.  He awoke refreshed, and
eager for a repetition of his pleasures.  Obedient to Matilda's order,
He visited not her Cell during the day. Father Pablos mentioned in the
Refectory that Rosario had at length been prevailed upon to follow his
prescription; But that the medicine had not produced the slightest
effect, and that He believed no mortal skill could rescue him from the
Grave.  With this opinion the Abbot agreed, and affected to lament the
untimely fate of a Youth, whose talents had appeared so promising.

The night arrived.  Ambrosio had taken care to procure from the Porter
the Key of the low door opening into the Cemetery. Furnished with this,
when all was silent in the Monastery, He quitted his Cell, and hastened
to Matilda's.  She had left her bed, and was drest before his arrival.

'I have been expecting you with impatience,' said She; 'My life depends
upon these moments.  Have you the Key?'

'I have.'

'Away then to the garden.  We have no time to lose. Follow me!'

She took a small covered Basket from the Table. Bearing this in one
hand, and the Lamp, which was flaming upon the Hearth, in the other,
She hastened from the Cell.  Ambrosio followed her.  Both maintained a
profound silence.  She moved on with quick but cautious steps, passed
through the Cloisters, and reached the Western side of the Garden.  Her
eyes flashed with a fire and wildness which impressed the Monk at once
with awe and horror. A determined desperate courage reigned upon her
brow.  She gave the Lamp to Ambrosio; Then taking from him the Key, She
unlocked the low Door, and entered the Cemetery.  It was a vast and
spacious Square planted with yew trees:  Half of it belonged to the
Abbey; The other half was the property of the Sisterhood of St. Clare,
and was protected by a roof of Stone.  The Division was marked by an
iron railing, the wicket of which was generally left unlocked.

Thither Matilda bent her course.  She opened the wicket and sought for
the door leading to the subterraneous Vaults, where reposed the
mouldering Bodies of the Votaries of St. Clare.  The night was
perfectly dark; Neither Moon or Stars were visible. Luckily there was
not a breath of Wind, and the Friar bore his Lamp in full security:  By
the assistance of its beams, the door of the Sepulchre was soon
discovered.  It was sunk within the hollow of a wall, and almost
concealed by thick festoons of ivy hanging over it.  Three steps of
rough-hewn Stone conducted to it, and Matilda was on the point of
descending them when She suddenly started back.

'There are People in the Vaults!' She whispered to the Monk; 'Conceal
yourself till they are past.

She took refuge behind a lofty and magnificent Tomb, erected in honour
of the Convent's Foundress.  Ambrosio followed her example, carefully
hiding his Lamp lest its beams should betray them.  But a few moments
had elapsed when the Door was pushed open leading to the subterraneous
Caverns.  Rays of light proceeded up the Staircase:  They enabled the
concealed Spectators to observe two Females drest in religious habits,
who seemed engaged in earnest conversation.  The Abbot had no
difficulty to recognize the Prioress of St. Clare in the first, and one
of the elder Nuns in her Companion.

'Every thing is prepared,' said the Prioress; 'Her fate shall be
decided tomorrow.  All her tears and sighs will be unavailing. No!  In
five and twenty years that I have been Superior of this Convent, never
did I witness a transaction more infamous!'

'You must expect much opposition to your will;' the Other replied in a
milder voice; 'Agnes has many Friends in the Convent, and in particular
the Mother St. Ursula will espouse her cause most warmly.  In truth,
She merits to have Friends; and I wish I could prevail upon you to
consider her youth, and her peculiar situation.  She seems sensible of
her fault; The excess of her grief proves her penitence, and I am
convinced that her tears flow more from contrition than fear of
punishment.  Reverend Mother, would you be persuaded to mitigate the
severity of your sentence, would you but deign to overlook this first
transgression, I offer myself as the pledge of her future conduct.'

'Overlook it, say you?  Mother Camilla, you amaze me!  What? After
disgracing me in the presence of Madrid's Idol, of the very Man on whom
I most wished to impress an idea of the strictness of my discipline?
How despicable must I have appeared to the reverend Abbot!  No, Mother,
No! I never can forgive the insult. I cannot better convince Ambrosio
that I abhor such crimes, than by punishing that of Agnes with all the
rigour of which our severe laws admit.  Cease then your supplications;
They will all be unavailing.  My resolution is taken:  Tomorrow Agnes
shall be made a terrible example of my justice and resentment.'

The Mother Camilla seemed not to give up the point, but by this time
the Nuns were out of hearing.  The Prioress unlocked the door which
communicated with St. Clare's Chapel, and having entered with her
Companion, closed it again after them.

Matilda now asked, who was this Agnes with whom the Prioress was thus
incensed, and what connexion She could have with Ambrosio. He related
her adventure; and He added, that since that time his ideas having
undergone a thorough revolution, He now felt much compassion for the
unfortunate Nun.

'I design,' said He, 'to request an audience of the Domina tomorrow,
and use every means of obtaining a mitigation of her sentence.'

'Beware of what you do!' interrupted Matilda; 'Your sudden change of
sentiment may naturally create surprize, and may give birth to
suspicions which it is most our interest to avoid.  Rather, redouble
your outward austerity, and thunder out menaces against the errors of
others, the better to conceal your own.  Abandon the Nun to her fate.
Your interfering might be dangerous, and her imprudence merits to be
punished:  She is unworthy to enjoy Love's pleasures, who has not wit
enough to conceal them.  But in discussing this trifling subject I
waste moments which are precious.  The night flies apace, and much must
be done before morning.  The Nuns are retired; All is safe.  Give me
the Lamp, Ambrosio. I must descend alone into these Caverns:  Wait
here, and if any one approaches, warn me by your voice; But as you
value your existence, presume not to follow me.  Your life would fall a
victim to your imprudent curiosity.'

Thus saying She advanced towards the Sepulchre, still holding her Lamp
in one hand, and her little Basket in the other.  She touched the door:
It turned slowly upon its grating hinges, and a narrow winding
staircase of black marble presented itself to her eyes.  She descended
it.  Ambrosio remained above, watching the faint beams of the Lamp as
they still proceeded up the stairs.  They disappeared, and He found
himself in total darkness.

Left to himself He could not reflect without surprize on the sudden
change in Matilda's character and sentiments.  But a few days had past
since She appeared the mildest and softest of her sex, devoted to his
will, and looking up to him as to a superior Being.  Now She assumed a
sort of courage and manliness in her manners and discourse but
ill-calculated to please him.  She spoke no longer to insinuate, but
command:  He found himself unable to cope with her in argument, and was
unwillingly obliged to confess the superiority of her judgment.  Every
moment convinced him of the astonishing powers of her mind:  But what
She gained in the opinion of the Man, She lost with interest in the
affection of the Lover.  He regretted Rosario, the fond, the gentle,
and submissive:  He grieved that Matilda preferred the virtues of his
sex to those of her own; and when He thought of her expressions
respecting the devoted Nun, He could not help blaming them as cruel and
unfeminine.  Pity is a sentiment so natural, so appropriate to the
female character, that it is scarcely a merit for a Woman to possess
it, but to be without it is a grievous crime.  Ambrosio could not
easily forgive his Mistress for being deficient in this amiable
quality.  However, though he blamed her insensibility, He felt the
truth of her observations; and though He pitied sincerely the
unfortunate Agnes, He resolved to drop the idea of interposing in her
behalf.

Near an hour had elapsed, since Matilda descended into the Caverns;
Still She returned not.  Ambrosio's curiosity was excited.  He drew
near the Staircase.  He listened.  All was silent, except that at
intervals He caught the sound of Matilda's voice, as it wound along the
subterraneous passages, and was re-echoed by the Sepulchre's vaulted
roofs.  She was at too great a distance for him to distinguish her
words, and ere they reached him they were deadened into a low murmur.
He longed to penetrate into this mystery.  He resolved to disobey her
injunctions and follow her into the Cavern.  He advanced to the
Staircase; He had already descended some steps when his courage failed
him. He remembered Matilda's menaces if He infringed her orders, and
his bosom was filled with a secret unaccountable awe.  He returned up
the stairs, resumed his former station, and waited impatiently for the
conclusion of this adventure.

Suddenly He was sensible of a violent shock:  An earthquake rocked the
ground.  The Columns which supported the roof under which He stood were
so strongly shaken, that every moment menaced him with its fall, and at
the same moment He heard a loud and tremendous burst of thunder.  It
ceased, and his eyes being fixed upon the Staircase, He saw a bright
column of light flash along the Caverns beneath.  It was seen but for
an instant.  No sooner did it disappear, than all was once more quiet
and obscure.  Profound Darkness again surrounded him, and the silence
of night was only broken by the whirring Bat, as She flitted slowly by
him.

With every instant Ambrosio's amazement increased.  Another hour
elapsed, after which the same light again appeared and was lost again
as suddenly.  It was accompanied by a strain of sweet but solemn Music,
which as it stole through the Vaults below, inspired the Monk with
mingled delight and terror.  It had not long been hushed, when He heard
Matilda's steps upon the Staircase.  She ascended from the Cavern; The
most lively joy animated her beautiful features.

'Did you see any thing?' She asked.

'Twice I saw a column of light flash up the Staircase.'

'Nothing else?'

'Nothing.'

'The Morning is on the point of breaking.  Let us retire to the Abbey,
lest daylight should betray us.'

With a light step She hastened from the burying-ground.  She regained
her Cell, and the curious Abbot still accompanied her. She closed the
door, and disembarrassed herself of her Lamp and Basket.

'I have succeeded!' She cried, throwing herself upon his bosom:
'Succeeded beyond my fondest hopes!  I shall live, Ambrosio, shall live
for you!  The step which I shuddered at taking proves to me a source of
joys inexpressible!  Oh! that I dared communicate those joys to you!
Oh! that I were permitted to share with you my power, and raise you as
high above the level of your sex, as one bold deed has exalted me above
mine!'

'And what prevents you, Matilda?' interrupted the Friar; 'Why is your
business in the Cavern made a secret?  Do you think me undeserving of
your confidence?  Matilda, I must doubt the truth of your affection,
while you have joys in which I am forbidden to share.'

'You reproach me with injustice.  I grieve sincerely that I am obliged
to conceal from you my happiness.  But I am not to blame: The fault
lies not in me, but in yourself, my Ambrosio!  You are still too much
the Monk.  Your mind is enslaved by the prejudices of Education; And
Superstition might make you shudder at the idea of that which
experience has taught me to prize and value.  At present you are unfit
to be trusted with a secret of such importance:  But the strength of
your judgment; and the curiosity which I rejoice to see sparkling in
your eyes, makes me hope that you will one day deserve my confidence.
Till that period arrives, restrain your impatience.  Remember that you
have given me your solemn oath never to enquire into this night's
adventures.  I insist upon your keeping this oath: For though' She
added smiling, while She sealed his lips with a wanton kiss; 'Though I
forgive your breaking your vows to heaven, I expect you to keep your
vows to me.'

The Friar returned the embrace which had set his blood on fire. The
luxurious and unbounded excesses of the former night were renewed, and
they separated not till the Bell rang for Matins.

The same pleasures were frequently repeated.  The Monks rejoiced in the
feigned Rosario's unexpected recovery, and none of them suspected his
real sex.  The Abbot possessed his Mistress in tranquillity, and
perceiving his frailty unsuspected, abandoned himself to his passions
in full security.  Shame and remorse no longer tormented him.  Frequent
repetitions made him familiar with sin, and his bosom became proof
against the stings of Conscience.  In these sentiments He was
encouraged by Matilda; But She soon was aware that She had satiated her
Lover by the unbounded freedom of her caresses.  Her charms becoming
accustomed to him, they ceased to excite the same desires which at
first they had inspired.  The delirium of passion being past, He had
leisure to observe every trifling defect:  Where none were to be found,
Satiety made him fancy them.  The Monk was glutted with the fullness of
pleasure:  A Week had scarcely elapsed before He was wearied of his
Paramour: His warm constitution still made him seek in her arms the
gratification of his lust: But when the moment of passion was over, He
quitted her with disgust, and his humour, naturally inconstant, made
him sigh impatiently for variety.

Possession, which cloys Man, only increases the affection of Woman.
Matilda with every succeeding day grew more attached to the Friar.
Since He had obtained her favours, He was become dearer to her than
ever, and She felt grateful to him for the pleasures in which they had
equally been Sharers.  Unfortunately as her passion grew ardent,
Ambrosio's grew cold; The very marks of her fondness excited his
disgust, and its excess served to extinguish the flame which already
burned but feebly in his bosom.  Matilda could not but remark that her
society seemed to him daily less agreeable:  He was inattentive while
She spoke: her musical talents, which She possessed in perfection, had
lost the power of amusing him; Or if He deigned to praise them, his
compliments were evidently forced and cold.  He no longer gazed upon
her with affection, or applauded her sentiments with a Lover's
partiality.  This Matilda well perceived, and redoubled her efforts to
revive those sentiments which He once had felt. She could not but fail,
since He considered as importunities the pains which She took to please
him, and was disgusted by the very means which She used to recall the
Wanderer.  Still, however, their illicit Commerce continued:  But it
was clear that He was led to her arms, not by love, but the cravings of
brutal appetite.  His constitution made a Woman necessary to him, and
Matilda was the only one with whom He could indulge his passions
safely:  In spite of her beauty, He gazed upon every other Female with
more desire; But fearing that his Hypocrisy should be made public, He
confined his inclinations to his own breast.

It was by no means his nature to be timid:  But his education had
impressed his mind with fear so strongly, that apprehension was now
become part of his character. Had his Youth been passed in the world,
He would have shown himself possessed of many brilliant and manly
qualities.  He was naturally enterprizing, firm, and fearless:  He had
a Warrior's heart, and He might have shone with splendour at the head
of an Army.  There was no want of generosity in his nature:  The
Wretched never failed to find in him a compassionate Auditor: His
abilities were quick and shining, and his judgment, vast, solid, and
decisive.  With such qualifications He would have been an ornament to
his Country: That He possessed them, He had given proofs in his
earliest infancy, and his Parents had beheld his dawning virtues with
the fondest delight and admiration.  Unfortunately, while yet a Child
He was deprived of those Parents.  He fell into the power of a Relation
whose only wish about him was never to hear of him more; For that
purpose He gave him in charge to his Friend, the former Superior of the
Capuchins.  The Abbot, a very Monk, used all his endeavours to persuade
the Boy that happiness existed not without the walls of a Convent.  He
succeeded fully.  To deserve admittance into the order of St. Francis
was Ambrosio's highest ambition.  His Instructors carefully repressed
those virtues whose grandeur and disinterestedness were ill-suited to
the Cloister.  Instead of universal benevolence, He adopted a selfish
partiality for his own particular establishment:  He was taught to
consider compassion for the errors of Others as a crime of the blackest
dye:  The noble frankness of his temper was exchanged for servile
humility; and in order to break his natural spirit, the Monks terrified
his young mind by placing before him all the horrors with which
Superstition could furnish them:  They painted to him the torments of
the Damned in colours the most dark, terrible, and fantastic, and
threatened him at the slightest fault with eternal perdition.  No
wonder that his imagination constantly dwelling upon these fearful
objects should have rendered his character timid and apprehensive.  Add
to this, that his long absence from the great world, and total
unacquaintance with the common dangers of life, made him form of them
an idea far more dismal than the reality.  While the Monks were busied
in rooting out his virtues and narrowing his sentiments, they allowed
every vice which had fallen to his share to arrive at full perfection.
He was suffered to be proud, vain, ambitious, and disdainful:  He was
jealous of his Equals, and despised all merit but his own:  He was
implacable when offended, and cruel in his revenge. Still in spite of
the pains taken to pervert them, his natural good qualities would
occasionally break through the gloom cast over them so carefully:

At such times the contest for superiority between his real and acquired
character was striking and unaccountable to those unacquainted with his
original disposition.  He pronounced the most severe sentences upon
Offenders, which, the moment after, Compassion induced him to mitigate:
He undertook the most daring enterprizes, which the fear of their
consequences soon obliged him to abandon:  His inborn genius darted a
brilliant light upon subjects the most obscure; and almost
instantaneously his Superstition replunged them in darkness more
profound than that from which they had just been rescued.  His Brother
Monks, regarding him as a Superior Being, remarked not this
contradiction in their Idol's conduct.  They were persuaded that what
He did must be right, and supposed him to have good reasons for
changing his resolutions.  The fact was, that the different sentiments
with which Education and Nature had inspired him were combating in his
bosom:  It remained for his passions, which as yet no opportunity had
called into play, to decide the victory.  Unfortunately his passions
were the very worst Judges, to whom He could possibly have applied.
His monastic seclusion had till now been in his favour, since it gave
him no room for discovering his bad qualities.  The superiority of his
talents raised him too far above his Companions to permit his being
jealous of them:  His exemplary piety, persuasive eloquence, and
pleasing manners had secured him universal Esteem, and consequently He
had no injuries to revenge:  His Ambition was justified by his
acknowledged merit, and his pride considered as no more than proper
confidence.  He never saw, much less conversed with, the other sex:  He
was ignorant of the pleasures in Woman's power to bestow, and if He
read in the course of his studies

   'That Men were fond, He smiled, and wondered how!'

For a time, spare diet, frequent watching, and severe penance cooled
and represt the natural warmth of his constitution:  But no sooner did
opportunity present itself, no sooner did He catch a glimpse of joys to
which He was still a Stranger, than Religion's barriers were too feeble
to resist the overwhelming torrent of his desires.  All impediments
yielded before the force of his temperament, warm, sanguine, and
voluptuous in the excess.

As yet his other passions lay dormant; But they only needed to be once
awakened, to display themselves with violence as great and irresistible.

He continued to be the admiration of Madrid.  The Enthusiasm created by
his eloquence seemed rather to increase than diminish.

Every Thursday, which was the only day when He appeared in public, the
Capuchin Cathedral was crowded with Auditors, and his discourse was
always received with the same approbation.  He was named Confessor to
all the chief families in Madrid; and no one was counted fashionable
who was injoined penance by any other than Ambrosio.  In his resolution
of never stirring out of his Convent, He still persisted. This
circumstance created a still greater opinion of his sanctity and
self-denial.  Above all, the Women sang forth his praises loudly, less
influenced by devotion than by his noble countenance, majestic air, and
well-turned, graceful figure.  The Abbey door was thronged with
Carriages from morning to night; and the noblest and fairest Dames of
Madrid confessed to the Abbot their secret peccadilloes.

The eyes of the luxurious Friar devoured their charms:  Had his
Penitents consulted those Interpreters, He would have needed no other
means of expressing his desires.  For his misfortune, they were so
strongly persuaded of his continence, that the possibility of his
harbouring indecent thoughts never once entered their imaginations.
The climate's heat, 'tis well known, operates with no small influence
upon the constitutions of the Spanish Ladies:  But the most abandoned
would have thought it an easier task to inspire with passion the marble
Statue of St. Francis than the cold and rigid heart of the immaculate
Ambrosio.

On his part, the Friar was little acquainted with the depravity of the
world; He suspected not that but few of his Penitents would have
rejected his addresses.  Yet had He been better instructed on this
head, the danger attending such an attempt would have sealed up his
lips in silence.  He knew that it would be difficult for a Woman to
keep a secret so strange and so important as his frailty; and He even
trembled lest Matilda should betray him.  Anxious to preserve a
reputation which was infinitely dear to him, He saw all the risque of
committing it to the power of some vain giddy Female; and as the
Beauties of Madrid affected only his senses without touching his heart,
He forgot them as soon as they were out of his sight.  The danger of
discovery, the fear of being repulsed, the loss of reputation, all
these considerations counselled him to stifle his desires: And though
He now felt for it the most perfect indifference, He was necessitated
to confine himself to Matilda's person.

One morning, the confluence of Penitents was greater than usual. He was
detained in the Confessional Chair till a late hour.  At length the
crowd was dispatched, and He prepared to quit the Chapel, when two
Females entered and drew near him with humility.  They threw up their
veils, and the youngest entreated him to listen to her for a few
moments.  The melody of her voice, of that voice to which no Man ever
listened without interest, immediately caught Ambrosio's attention.  He
stopped.  The Petitioner seemed bowed down with affliction:  Her cheeks
were pale, her eyes dimmed with tears, and her hair fell in disorder
over her face and bosom.  Still her countenance was so sweet, so
innocent, so heavenly, as might have charmed an heart less susceptible,
than that which panted in the Abbot's breast.  With more than usual
softness of manner He desired her to proceed, and heard her speak as
follows with an emotion which increased every moment.

'Reverend Father, you see an Unfortunate, threatened with the loss of
her dearest, of almost her only Friend!  My Mother, my excellent Mother
lies upon the bed of sickness.  A sudden and dreadful malady seized her
last night; and so rapid has been its progress, that the Physicians
despair of her life.  Human aid fails me; Nothing remains for me but to
implore the mercy of Heaven.  Father, all Madrid rings with the report
of your piety and virtue.  Deign to remember my Mother in your prayers:
Perhaps they may prevail on the Almighty to spare her; and should that
be the case, I engage myself every Thursday in the next three Months to
illuminate the Shrine of St. Francis in his honour.'

'So!' thought the Monk; 'Here we have a second Vincentio della Ronda.
Rosario's adventure began thus,' and He wished secretly that this might
have the same conclusion.

He acceded to the request.  The Petitioner returned him thanks with
every mark of gratitude, and then continued.

'I have yet another favour to ask.  We are Strangers in Madrid; My
Mother needs a Confessor, and knows not to whom She should apply.  We
understand that you never quit the Abbey, and Alas! my poor Mother is
unable to come hither!  If you would have the goodness, reverend
Father, to name a proper person, whose wise and pious consolations may
soften the agonies of my Parent's deathbed, you will confer an
everlasting favour upon hearts not ungrateful.'

With this petition also the Monk complied.  Indeed, what petition would
He have refused, if urged in such enchanting accents?  The suppliant
was so interesting!  Her voice was so sweet, so harmonious!  Her very
tears became her, and her affliction seemed to add new lustre to her
charms.  He promised to send to her a Confessor that same Evening, and
begged her to leave her address. The Companion presented him with a
Card on which it was written, and then withdrew with the fair
Petitioner, who pronounced before her departure a thousand benedictions
on the Abbot's goodness.  His eyes followed her out of the Chapel.  It
was not till She was out of sight that He examined the Card, on which
He read the following words.

'Donna Elvira Dalfa, Strada di San Iago, four doors from the Palace
d'Albornos.'

The Suppliant was no other than Antonia, and Leonella was her
Companion.  The Latter had not consented without difficulty to
accompany her Niece to the Abbey:  Ambrosio had inspired her with such
awe that She trembled at the very sight of him.  Her fears had
conquered even her natural loquacity, and while in his presence She
uttered not a single syllable.

The Monk retired to his Cell, whither He was pursued by Antonia's
image.  He felt a thousand new emotions springing in his bosom, and He
trembled to examine into the cause which gave them birth. They were
totally different from those inspired by Matilda, when She first
declared her sex and her affection.  He felt not the provocation of
lust; No voluptuous desires rioted in his bosom; Nor did a burning
imagination picture to him the charms which Modesty had veiled from his
eyes.  On the contrary, what He now felt was a mingled sentiment of
tenderness, admiration, and respect.  A soft and delicious melancholy
infused itself into his soul, and He would not have exchanged it for
the most lively transports of joy.  Society now disgusted him:  He
delighted in solitude, which permitted his indulging the visions of
Fancy: His thoughts were all gentle, sad, and soothing, and the whole
wide world presented him with no other object than Antonia.

'Happy Man!' He exclaimed in his romantic enthusiasm; 'Happy Man, who
is destined to possess the heart of that lovely Girl!  What delicacy in
her features!  What elegance in her form!  How enchanting was the timid
innocence of her eyes, and how different from the wanton expression,
the wild luxurious fire which sparkles in Matilda's!  Oh! sweeter must
one kiss be snatched from the rosy lips of the First, than all the full
and lustful favours bestowed so freely by the Second.  Matilda gluts me
with enjoyment even to loathing, forces me to her arms, apes the
Harlot, and glories in her prostitution.  Disgusting!  Did She know the
inexpressible charm of Modesty, how irresistibly it enthralls the heart
of Man, how firmly it chains him to the Throne of Beauty, She never
would have thrown it off.  What would be too dear a price for this
lovely Girl's affections?  What would I refuse to sacrifice, could I be
released from my vows, and permitted to declare my love in the sight of
earth and heaven?  While I strove to inspire her with tenderness, with
friendship and esteem, how tranquil and undisturbed would the hours
roll away!  Gracious God!  To see her blue downcast eyes beam upon mine
with timid fondness!  To sit for days, for years listening to that
gentle voice!  To acquire the right of obliging her, and hear the
artless expressions of her gratitude!  To watch the emotions of her
spotless heart!  To encourage each dawning virtue!  To share in her joy
when happy, to kiss away her tears when distrest, and to see her fly to
my arms for comfort and support!  Yes; If there is perfect bliss on
earth, 'tis his lot alone, who becomes that Angel's Husband.'

While his fancy coined these ideas, He paced his Cell with a disordered
air.  His eyes were fixed upon vacancy: His head reclined upon his
shoulder; A tear rolled down his cheek, while He reflected that the
vision of happiness for him could never be realized.

'She is lost to me!' He continued; 'By marriage She cannot be mine:
And to seduce such innocence, to use the confidence reposed in me to
work her ruin....  Oh! it would be a crime, blacker than yet the
world ever witnessed!  Fear not, lovely Girl!  Your virtue runs no
risque from me.  Not for Indies would I make that gentle bosom know the
tortures of remorse.'

Again He paced his chamber hastily.  Then stopping, his eye fell upon
the picture of his once-admired Madona. He tore it with indignation
from the wall:  He threw it on the ground, and spurned it from him with
his foot.

'The Prostitute!'

Unfortunate Matilda! Her Paramour forgot that for his sake alone She
had forfeited her claim to virtue; and his only reason for despising
her was that She had loved him much too well.

He threw himself into a Chair which stood near the Table.  He saw the
card with Elvira's address.  He took it up, and it brought to his
recollection his promise respecting a Confessor. He passed a few
minutes in doubt:  But Antonia's Empire over him was already too much
decided to permit his making a long resistance to the idea which struck
him.  He resolved to be the Confessor himself.  He could leave the
Abbey unobserved without difficulty:  By wrapping up his head in his
Cowl He hoped to pass through the Streets without being recognised: By
taking these precautions, and by recommending secrecy to Elvira's
family, He doubted not to keep Madrid in ignorance that He had broken
his vow never to see the outside of the Abbey walls.  Matilda was the
only person whose vigilance He dreaded:  But by informing her at the
Refectory that during the whole of that day, Business would confine him
to his Cell, He thought himself secure from her wakeful jealousy.
Accordingly, at the hours when the Spaniards are generally taking their
Siesta, He ventured to quit the Abbey by a private door, the Key of
which was in his possession.  The Cowl of his habit was thrown over his
face:  From the heat of the weather the Streets were almost totally
deserted: The Monk met with few people, found the Strada di San Iago,
and arrived without accident at Donna Elvira's door.  He rang, was
admitted, and immediately ushered into an upper apartment.

It was here that He ran the greatest risque of a discovery.  Had
Leonella been at home, She would have recognized him directly: Her
communicative disposition would never have permitted her to rest till
all Madrid was informed that Ambrosio had ventured out of the Abbey,
and visited her Sister.  Fortune here stood the Monk's Friend.  On
Leonella's return home, She found a letter instructing her that a
Cousin was just dead, who had left what little He possessed between
Herself and Elvira.  To secure this bequest She was obliged to set out
for Cordova without losing a moment.  Amidst all her foibles her heart
was truly warm and affectionate, and She was unwilling to quit her
Sister in so dangerous a state.  But Elvira insisted upon her taking
the journey, conscious that in her Daughter's forlorn situation no
increase of fortune, however trifling, ought to be neglected.
Accordingly, Leonella left Madrid, sincerely grieved at her Sister's
illness, and giving some few sighs to the memory of the amiable but
inconstant Don Christoval.  She was fully persuaded that at first She
had made a terrible breach in his heart:  But hearing nothing more of
him, She supposed that He had quitted the pursuit, disgusted by the
lowness of her origin, and knowing upon other terms than marriage He
had nothing to hope from such a Dragon of Virtue as She professed
herself; Or else, that being naturally capricious and changeable, the
remembrance of her charms had been effaced from the Conde's heart by
those of some newer Beauty.  Whatever was the cause of her losing him,
She lamented it sorely.  She strove in vain, as She assured every body
who was kind enough to listen to her, to tear his image from her too
susceptible heart.  She affected the airs of a lovesick Virgin, and
carried them all to the most ridiculous excess.  She heaved lamentable
sighs, walked with her arms folded, uttered long soliloquies, and her
discourse generally turned upon some forsaken Maid who expired of a
broken heart!  Her fiery locks were always ornamented with a garland of
willow; Every evening She was seen straying upon the Banks of a rivulet
by Moonlight; and She declared herself a violent Admirer of murmuring
Streams and Nightingales;

      'Of lonely haunts, and twilight Groves,
      'Places which pale Passion loves!'

Such was the state of Leonella's mind, when obliged to quit Madrid.
Elvira was out of patience at all these follies, and endeavoured at
persuading her to act like a reasonable Woman. Her advice was thrown
away: Leonella assured her at parting that nothing could make her
forget the perfidious Don Christoval.  In this point She was
fortunately mistaken.  An honest Youth of Cordova, Journeyman to an
Apothecary, found that her fortune would be sufficient to set him up in
a genteel Shop of his own: In consequence of this reflection He avowed
himself her Admirer. Leonella was not inflexible. The ardour of his
sighs melted her heart, and She soon consented to make him the happiest
of Mankind.  She wrote to inform her Sister of her marriage; But, for
reasons which will be explained hereafter, Elvira never answered her
letter.

Ambrosio was conducted into the Antichamber to that where Elvira was
reposing.  The Female Domestic who had admitted him left him alone
while She announced his arrival to her Mistress. Antonia, who had been
by her Mother's Bedside, immediately came to him.

'Pardon me, Father,' said She, advancing towards him; when recognizing
his features, She stopped suddenly, and uttered a cry of joy.  'Is it
possible!' She continued;

'Do not my eyes deceive me?  Has the worthy Ambrosio broken through his
resolution, that He may soften the agonies of the best of Women?  What
pleasure will this visit give my Mother! Let me not delay for a moment
the comfort which your piety and wisdom will afford her.'

Thus saying, She opened the chamber door, presented to her Mother her
distinguished Visitor, and having placed an armed-chair by the side of
the Bed, withdrew into another department.

Elvira was highly gratified by this visit:  Her expectations had been
raised high by general report, but She found them far exceeded.
Ambrosio, endowed by nature with powers of pleasing, exerted them to
the utmost while conversing with Antonia's Mother.  With persuasive
eloquence He calmed every fear, and dissipated every scruple:  He bad
her reflect on the infinite mercy of her Judge, despoiled Death of his
darts and terrors, and taught her to view without shrinking the abyss
of eternity, on whose brink She then stood.  Elvira was absorbed in
attention and delight:  While She listened to his exhortations,
confidence and comfort stole insensibly into her mind.  She unbosomed
to him without hesitation her cares and apprehensions.  The latter
respecting a future life He had already quieted:  And He now removed
the former, which She felt for the concerns of this.  She trembled for
Antonia.  She had none to whose care She could recommend her, save to
the Marquis de las Cisternas and her Sister Leonella.  The protection
of the One was very uncertain; and as to the Other, though fond of her
Niece, Leonella was so thoughtless and vain as to make her an improper
person to have the sole direction of a Girl so young and ignorant of
the World. The Friar no sooner learnt the cause of her alarms than He
begged her to make herself easy upon that head.  He doubted not being
able to secure for Antonia a safe refuge in the House of one of his
Penitents, the Marchioness of Villa-Franca:  This was a Lady of
acknowledged virtue, remarkable for strict principles and extensive
charity.  Should accident deprive her of this resource, He engaged to
procure Antonia a reception in some respectable Convent:  That is to
say, in quality of boarder; for Elvira had declared herself no Friend
to a monastic life, and the Monk was either candid or complaisant
enough to allow that her disapprobation was not unfounded.

These proofs of the interest which He felt for her completely won
Elvira's heart.  In thanking him She exhausted every expression which
Gratitude could furnish, and protested that now She should resign
herself with tranquillity to the Grave. Ambrosio rose to take leave:
He promised to return the next day at the same hour, but requested that
his visits might be kept secret.

'I am unwilling' said He, 'that my breaking through a rule imposed by
necessity should be generally known.  Had I not resolved never to quit
my Convent, except upon circumstances as urgent as that which has
conducted me to your door, I should be frequently summoned upon
insignificant occasions:  That time would be engrossed by the Curious,
the Unoccupied, and the fanciful, which I now pass at the Bedside of
the Sick, in comforting the expiring Penitent, and clearing the passage
to Eternity from Thorns.'

Elvira commended equally his prudence and compassion, promising to
conceal carefully the honour of his visits.  The Monk then gave her his
benediction, and retired from the chamber.

In the Antiroom He found Antonia:  He could not refuse himself the
pleasure of passing a few moments in her society.  He bad her take
comfort, for that her Mother seemed composed and tranquil, and He hoped
that She might yet do well.  He enquired who attended her, and engaged
to send the Physician of his Convent to see her, one of the most
skilful in Madrid.  He then launched out in Elvira's commendation,
praised her purity and fortitude of mind, and declared that She had
inspired him with the highest esteem and reverence.  Antonia's innocent
heart swelled with gratitude:  Joy danced in her eyes, where a tear
still sparkled. The hopes which He gave her of her Mother's recovery,
the lively interest which He seemed to feel for her, and the flattering
way in which She was mentioned by him, added to the report of his
judgment and virtue, and to the impression made upon her by his
eloquence, confirmed the favourable opinion with which his first
appearance had inspired Antonia.  She replied with diffidence, but
without restraint:  She feared not to relate to him all her little
sorrows, all her little fears and anxieties; and She thanked him for
his goodness with all the genuine warmth which favours kindle in a
young and innocent heart.  Such alone know how to estimate benefits at
their full value.  They who are conscious of Mankind's perfidy and
selfishness, ever receive an obligation with apprehension and distrust:
They suspect that some secret motive must lurk behind it:  They express
their thanks with restraint and caution, and fear to praise a kind
action to its full extent, aware that some future day a return may be
required.  Not so Antonia; She thought the world was composed only of
those who resembled her, and that vice existed, was to her still a
secret.  The Monk had been of service to her; He said that He wished
her well; She was grateful for his kindness, and thought that no terms
were strong enough to be the vehicle of her thanks.  With what delight
did Ambrosio listen to the declaration of her artless gratitude!  The
natural grace of her manners, the unequalled sweetness of her voice,
her modest vivacity, her unstudied elegance, her expressive
countenance, and intelligent eyes united to inspire him with pleasure
and admiration, While the solidity and correctness of her remarks
received additional beauty from the unaffected simplicity of the
language in which they were conveyed.

Ambrosio was at length obliged to tear himself from this conversation
which possessed for him but too many charms.  He repeated to Antonia
his wishes that his visits should not be made known, which desire She
promised to observe.  He then quitted the House, while his Enchantress
hastened to her Mother, ignorant of the mischief which her Beauty had
caused.  She was eager to know Elvira's opinion of the Man whom She had
praised in such enthusiastic terms, and was delighted to find it
equally favourable, if not even more so, than her own.

'Even before He spoke,' said Elvira, 'I was prejudiced in his favour:
The fervour of his exhortations, dignity of his manner, and closeness
of his reasoning, were very far from inducing me to alter my opinion.
His fine and full-toned voice struck me particularly; But surely,
Antonia, I have heard it before.  It seemed perfectly familiar to my
ear.  Either I must have known the Abbot in former times, or his voice
bears a wonderful resemblance to that of some other, to whom I have
often listened.

There were certain tones which touched my very heart, and made me feel
sensations so singular, that I strive in vain to account for them.'

'My dearest Mother, it produced the same effect upon me:  Yet certainly
neither of us ever heard his voice till we came to Madrid.  I suspect
that what we attribute to his voice, really proceeds from his pleasant
manners, which forbid our considering him as a Stranger.  I know not
why, but I feel more at my ease while conversing with him than I
usually do with people who are unknown to me.  I feared not to repeat
to him all my childish thoughts; and somehow I felt confident that He
would hear my folly with indulgence.  Oh! I was not deceived in him!
He listened to me with such an air of kindness and attention!  He
answered me with such gentleness, such condescension! He did not call
me an Infant, and treat me with contempt, as our cross old Confessor at
the Castle used to do.  I verily believe that if I had lived in Murcia
a thousand years, I never should have liked that fat old Father
Dominic!'

'I confess that Father Dominic had not the most pleasing manners in the
world; But He was honest, friendly, and well-meaning.'

'Ah!  my dear Mother, those qualities are so common!'

'God grant, my Child, that Experience may not teach you to think them
rare and precious:  I have found them but too much so!  But tell me,
Antonia; Why is it impossible for me to have seen the Abbot before?'

'Because since the moment when He entered the Abbey, He has never been
on the outside of its walls.  He told me just now, that from his
ignorance of the Streets, He had some difficulty to find the Strada di
San Iago, though so near the Abbey.'

'All this is possible, and still I may have seen him BEFORE He entered
the Abbey:  In order to come out, it was rather necessary that He
should first go in.'

'Holy Virgin!  As you say, that is very true.--Oh! But might He not
have been born in the Abbey?'

Elvira smiled.

'Why, not very easily.'

'Stay, Stay!  Now I recollect how it was.  He was put into the Abbey
quite a Child; The common People say that He fell from heaven, and was
sent as a present to the Capuchins by the Virgin.'

'That was very kind of her.  And so He fell from heaven, Antonia?

He must have had a terrible tumble.'

'Many do not credit this, and I fancy, my dear Mother, that I must
number you among the Unbelievers.  Indeed, as our Landlady told my
Aunt, the general idea is that his Parents, being poor and unable to
maintain him, left him just born at the Abbey door. The late Superior
from pure charity had him educated in the Convent, and He proved to be
a model of virtue, and piety, and learning, and I know not what else
besides:  In consequence, He was first received as a Brother of the
order, and not long ago was chosen Abbot.  However, whether this
account or the other is the true one, at least all agree that when the
Monks took him under their care, He could not speak:  Therefore, you
could not have heard his voice before He entered the Monastery, because
at that time He had no voice at all.'

'Upon my word, Antonia, you argue very closely!  Your conclusions are
infallible!  I did not suspect you of being so able a Logician.'

'Ah! You are mocking me!  But so much the better. It delights me to see
you in spirits:  Besides you seem tranquil and easy, and I hope that
you will have no more convulsions.  Oh! I was sure the Abbot's visit
would do you good!'

'It has indeed done me good, my Child.  He has quieted my mind upon
some points which agitated me, and I already feel the effects of his
attention.  My eyes grow heavy, and I think I can sleep a little.  Draw
the curtains, my Antonia:  But if I should not wake before midnight, do
not sit up with me, I charge you.'

Antonia promised to obey her, and having received her blessing drew the
curtains of the Bed.  She then seated herself in silence at her
embroidery frame, and beguiled the hours with building Castles in the
air.  Her spirits were enlivened by the evident change for the better
in Elvira, and her fancy presented her with visions bright and
pleasing.  In these dreams Ambrosio made no despicable figure.  She
thought of him with joy and gratitude; But for every idea which fell to
the Friar's share, at least two were unconsciously bestowed upon
Lorenzo.  Thus passed the time, till the Bell in the neighbouring
Steeple of the Capuchin Cathedral announced the hour of midnight:
Antonia remembered her Mother's injunctions, and obeyed them, though
with reluctance. She undrew the curtains with caution.  Elvira was
enjoying a profound and quiet slumber; Her cheek glowed with health's
returning colours:  A smile declared that her dreams were pleasant, and
as Antonia bent over her, She fancied that She heard her name
pronounced.  She kissed her Mother's forehead softly, and retired to
her chamber.  There She knelt before a Statue of St. Rosolia, her
Patroness; She recommended herself to the protection of heaven, and as
had been her custom from infancy, concluded her devotions by chaunting
the following Stanzas.

  MIDNIGHT HYMN

    Now all is hushed; The solemn chime
  No longer swells the nightly gale:
  Thy awful presence, Hour sublime,
  With spotless heart once more I hail.

    'Tis now the moment still and dread,
  When Sorcerers use their baleful power;
  When Graves give up their buried dead
  To profit by the sanctioned hour:

    From guilt and guilty thoughts secure,
  To duty and devotion true,
  With bosom light and conscience pure,
  Repose, thy gentle aid I woo.

    Good Angels, take my thanks, that still
  The snares of vice I view with scorn;
  Thanks, that to-night as free from ill
  I sleep, as when I woke at morn.

    Yet may not my unconscious breast
  Harbour some guilt to me unknown?
  Some wish impure, which unreprest
  You blush to see, and I to own?

    If such there be, in gentle dream
  Instruct my feet to shun the snare;
  Bid truth upon my errors beam,
  And deign to make me still your care.

    Chase from my peaceful bed away
  The witching Spell, a foe to rest,
  The nightly Goblin, wanton Fay,
  The Ghost in pain, and Fiend unblest:

    Let not the Tempter in mine ear
  Pour lessons of unhallowed joy;
  Let not the Night-mare, wandering near
  My Couch, the calm of sleep destroy;

    Let not some horrid dream affright
  With strange fantastic forms mine eyes;
  But rather bid some vision bright
  Display the bliss of yonder skies.

    Show me the crystal Domes of Heaven,
  The worlds of light where Angels lie;
  Shew me the lot to Mortals given,
  Who guiltless live, who guiltless die.

    Then show me how a seat to gain
  Amidst those blissful realms of
  Air;  Teach me to shun each guilty stain,
  And guide me to the good and fair.

    So every morn and night, my Voice
  To heaven the grateful strain shall raise;
  In You as Guardian Powers rejoice,
  Good Angels, and exalt your praise:

    So will I strive with zealous fire
  Each vice to shun, each fault correct;
  Will love the lessons you inspire,
  And Prize the virtues you protect.

    Then when at length by high command
  My body seeks the Grave's repose,
  When Death draws nigh with friendly hand
  My failing Pilgrim eyes to close;

    Pleased that my soul has 'scaped the wreck,
  Sighless will I my life resign,
  And yield to God my Spirit back,
  As pure as when it first was mine.


Having finished her usual devotions, Antonia retired to bed. Sleep soon
stole over her senses; and for several hours She enjoyed that calm
repose which innocence alone can know, and for which many a Monarch
with pleasure would exchange his Crown.