III


     As when a wave, that from a cloud impends,
 And, swell'd with tempests, on the ship descends,
 White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud,
 Howl o'er the masts, and sing through ev'ry shroud:
 Pale, trembling, tir'd, the sailors freeze with fears,
 And instant death on ev'ry wave appears.
     POPE'S HOMER

The Lady Blanche, meanwhile, who was left much alone, became impatient
for the company of her new friend, whom she wished to observe sharing in
the delight she received from the beautiful scenery around. She had now
no person, to whom she could express her admiration and communicate
her pleasures, no eye, that sparkled to her smile, or countenance, that
reflected her happiness; and she became spiritless and pensive. The
Count, observing her dissatisfaction, readily yielded to her entreaties,
and reminded Emily of her promised visit; but the silence of Valancourt,
which was now prolonged far beyond the period, when a letter might
have arrived from Estuviere, oppressed Emily with severe anxiety, and,
rendering her averse to society, she would willingly have deferred her
acceptance of this invitation, till her spirits should be relieved.
The Count and his family, however, pressed to see her; and, as the
circumstances, that prompted her wish for solitude, could not be
explained, there was an appearance of caprice in her refusal, which she
could not persevere in, without offending the friends, whose esteem
she valued. At length, therefore, she returned upon a second visit
to Chateau-le-Blanc. Here the friendly manner of Count De Villefort
encouraged Emily to mention to him her situation, respecting the estates
of her late aunt, and to consult him on the means of recovering them. He
had little doubt, that the law would decide in her favour, and, advising
her to apply to it, offered first to write to an advocate at Avignon,
on whose opinion he thought he could rely. His kindness was gratefully
accepted by Emily, who, soothed by the courtesy she daily experienced,
would have been once more happy, could she have been assured of
Valancourt's welfare and unaltered affection. She had now been above a
week at the chateau, without receiving intelligence of him, and, though
she knew, that, if he was absent from his brother's residence, it was
scarcely probable her letter had yet reached him, she could not forbear
to admit doubts and fears, that destroyed her peace. Again she would
consider of all, that might have happened in the long period, since her
first seclusion at Udolpho, and her mind was sometimes so overwhelmed
with an apprehension, that Valancourt was no more, or that he lived
no longer for her, that the company even of Blanche became intolerably
oppressive, and she would sit alone in her apartment for hours together,
when the engagements of the family allowed her to do so, without
incivility.

In one of these solitary hours, she unlocked a little box, which
contained some letters of Valancourt, with some drawings she had
sketched, during her stay in Tuscany, the latter of which were no
longer interesting to her; but, in the letters, she now, with melancholy
indulgence, meant to retrace the tenderness, that had so often soothed
her, and rendered her, for a moment, insensible of the distance, which
separated her from the writer. But their effect was now changed; the
affection they expressed appealed so forcibly to her heart, when she
considered that it had, perhaps, yielded to the powers of time and
absence, and even the view of the hand-writing recalled so many painful
recollections, that she found herself unable to go through the first she
had opened, and sat musing, with her cheek resting on her arm, and tears
stealing from her eyes, when old Dorothee entered the room to inform
her, that dinner would be ready, an hour before the usual time. Emily
started on perceiving her, and hastily put up the papers, but not before
Dorothee had observed both her agitation and her tears.

'Ah, ma'amselle!' said she, 'you, who are so young,--have you reason for
sorrow?'

Emily tried to smile, but was unable to speak.

'Alas! dear young lady, when you come to my age, you will not weep at
trifles; and surely you have nothing serious, to grieve you.'

'No, Dorothee, nothing of any consequence,' replied Emily. Dorothee, now
stooping to pick up something, that had dropped from among the papers,
suddenly exclaimed, 'Holy Mary! what is it I see?' and then, trembling,
sat down in a chair, that stood by the table.

'What is it you do see?' said Emily, alarmed by her manner, and looking
round the room.

'It is herself,' said Dorothee, 'her very self! just as she looked a
little before she died!'

Emily, still more alarmed, began now to fear, that Dorothee was seized
with sudden phrensy, but entreated her to explain herself.

'That picture!' said she, 'where did you find it, lady? it is my blessed
mistress herself!'

She laid on the table the miniature, which Emily had long ago found
among the papers her father had enjoined her to destroy, and over
which she had once seen him shed such tender and affecting tears; and,
recollecting all the various circumstances of his conduct, that had long
perplexed her, her emotions increased to an excess, which deprived her
of all power to ask the questions she trembled to have answered, and she
could only enquire, whether Dorothee was certain the picture resembled
the late marchioness.

'O, ma'amselle!' said she, 'how came it to strike me so, the instant I
saw it, if it was not my lady's likeness? Ah!' added she, taking up the
miniature, 'these are her own blue eyes--looking so sweet and so mild;
and there is her very look, such as I have often seen it, when she had
sat thinking for a long while, and then, the tears would often steal
down her cheeks--but she never would complain! It was that look so meek,
as it were, and resigned, that used to break my heart and make me love
her so!'

'Dorothee!' said Emily solemnly, 'I am interested in the cause of that
grief, more so, perhaps, than you may imagine; and I entreat, that you
will no longer refuse to indulge my curiosity;--it is not a common one.'

As Emily said this, she remembered the papers, with which the picture
had been found, and had scarcely a doubt, that they had concerned the
Marchioness de Villeroi; but with this supposition came a scruple,
whether she ought to enquire further on a subject, which might prove to
be the same, that her father had so carefully endeavoured to conceal.
Her curiosity, concerning the Marchioness, powerful as it was, it is
probable she would now have resisted, as she had formerly done, on
unwarily observing the few terrible words in the papers, which had never
since been erased from her memory, had she been certain that the history
of that lady was the subject of those papers, or, that such simple
particulars only as it was probable Dorothee could relate were included
in her father's command. What was known to her could be no secret to
many other persons; and, since it appeared very unlikely, that St.
Aubert should attempt to conceal what Emily might learn by ordinary
means, she at length concluded, that, if the papers had related to the
story of the Marchioness, it was not those circumstances of it, which
Dorothee could disclose, that he had thought sufficiently important to
wish to have concealed. She, therefore, no longer hesitated to make the
enquiries, that might lead to the gratification of her curiosity.

'Ah, ma'amselle!' said Dorothee, 'it is a sad story, and cannot be told
now: but what am I saying? I never will tell it. Many years have passed,
since it happened; and I never loved to talk of the Marchioness to any
body, but my husband. He lived in the family, at that time, as well as
myself, and he knew many particulars from me, which nobody else did; for
I was about the person of my lady in her last illness, and saw and heard
as much, or more than my lord himself. Sweet saint! how patient she was!
When she died, I thought I could have died with her!'

'Dorothee,' said Emily, interrupting her, 'what you shall tell, you may
depend upon it, shall never be disclosed by me. I have, I repeat it,
particular reasons for wishing to be informed on this subject, and am
willing to bind myself, in the most solemn manner, never to mention what
you shall wish me to conceal.'

Dorothee seemed surprised at the earnestness of Emily's manner, and,
after regarding her for some moments, in silence, said, 'Young lady!
that look of yours pleads for you--it is so like my dear mistress's,
that I can almost fancy I see her before me; if you were her daughter,
you could not remind me of her more. But dinner will be ready--had you
not better go down?'

'You will first promise to grant my request,' said Emily.

'And ought not you first to tell me, ma'amselle, how this picture fell
into your hands, and the reasons you say you have for curiosity about my
lady?'

'Why, no, Dorothee,' replied Emily, recollecting herself, 'I have also
particular reasons for observing silence, on these subjects, at least,
till I know further; and, remember, I do not promise ever to speak upon
them; therefore, do not let me induce you to satisfy my curiosity, from
an expectation, that I shall gratify yours. What I may judge proper to
conceal, does not concern myself alone, or I should have less scruple
in revealing it: let a confidence in my honour alone persuade you to
disclose what I request.'

'Well, lady!' replied Dorothee, after a long pause, during which her
eyes were fixed upon Emily, 'you seem so much interested,--and this
picture and that face of yours make me think you have some reason to
be so,--that I will trust you--and tell some things, that I never told
before to any body, but my husband, though there are people, who have
suspected as much. I will tell you the particulars of my lady's death,
too, and some of my own suspicions; but you must first promise me by all
the saints'--

Emily, interrupting her, solemnly promised never to reveal what should
be confided to her, without Dorothee's consent.

'But there is the horn, ma'amselle, sounding for dinner,' said Dorothee;
'I must be gone.'

'When shall I see you again?' enquired Emily.

Dorothee mused, and then replied, 'Why, madam, it may make people
curious, if it is known I am so much in your apartment, and that
I should be sorry for; so I will come when I am least likely to be
observed. I have little leisure in the day, and I shall have a good deal
to say; so, if you please, ma'am, I will come, when the family are all
in bed.'

'That will suit me very well,' replied Emily: 'Remember, then,
to-night'--

'Aye, that is well remembered,' said Dorothee, 'I fear I cannot come
to-night, madam, for there will be the dance of the vintage, and it will
be late, before the servants go to rest; for, when they once set in to
dance, they will keep it up, in the cool of the air, till morning; at
least, it used to be so in my time.'

'Ah! is it the dance of the vintage?' said Emily, with a deep sigh,
remembering, that it was on the evening of this festival, in the
preceding year, that St. Aubert and herself had arrived in the
neighbourhood of Chateau-le-Blanc. She paused a moment, overcome by
the sudden recollection, and then, recovering herself, added--'But this
dance is in the open woods; you, therefore, will not be wanted, and can
easily come to me.'

Dorothee replied, that she had been accustomed to be present at the
dance of the vintage, and she did not wish to be absent now; 'but if I
can get away, madam, I will,' said she.

Emily then hastened to the dining-room, where the Count conducted
himself with the courtesy, which is inseparable from true dignity, and
of which the Countess frequently practised little, though her manner to
Emily was an exception to her usual habit. But, if she retained few of
the ornamental virtues, she cherished other qualities, which she seemed
to consider invaluable. She had dismissed the grace of modesty, but
then she knew perfectly well how to manage the stare of assurance; her
manners had little of the tempered sweetness, which is necessary to
render the female character interesting, but she could occasionally
throw into them an affectation of spirits, which seemed to triumph over
every person, who approached her. In the country, however, she generally
affected an elegant languor, that persuaded her almost to faint,
when her favourite read to her a story of fictitious sorrow; but
her countenance suffered no change, when living objects of distress
solicited her charity, and her heart beat with no transport to the
thought of giving them instant relief;--she was a stranger to the
highest luxury, of which, perhaps, the human mind can be sensible, for
her benevolence had never yet called smiles upon the face of misery.

In the evening, the Count, with all his family, except the Countess and
Mademoiselle Bearn, went to the woods to witness the festivity of the
peasants. The scene was in a glade, where the trees, opening, formed a
circle round the turf they highly overshadowed; between their branches,
vines, loaded with ripe clusters, were hung in gay festoons; and,
beneath, were tables, with fruit, wine, cheese and other rural
fare,--and seats for the Count and his family. At a little distance,
were benches for the elder peasants, few of whom, however, could forbear
to join the jocund dance, which began soon after sun-set, when several
of sixty tripped it with almost as much glee and airy lightness, as
those of sixteen.

The musicians, who sat carelessly on the grass, at the foot of a tree,
seemed inspired by the sound of their own instruments, which were
chiefly flutes and a kind of long guitar. Behind, stood a boy,
flourishing a tamborine, and dancing a solo, except that, as he
sometimes gaily tossed the instrument, he tripped among the other
dancers, when his antic gestures called forth a broader laugh, and
heightened the rustic spirit of the scene.

The Count was highly delighted with the happiness he witnessed, to which
his bounty had largely contributed, and the Lady Blanche joined the
dance with a young gentleman of her father's party. Du Pont requested
Emily's hand, but her spirits were too much depressed, to permit her to
engage in the present festivity, which called to her remembrance that
of the preceding year, when St. Aubert was living, and of the melancholy
scenes, which had immediately followed it.

Overcome by these recollections, she, at length, left the spot, and
walked slowly into the woods, where the softened music, floating at a
distance, soothed her melancholy mind. The moon threw a mellow light
among the foliage; the air was balmy and cool, and Emily, lost in
thought, strolled on, without observing whither, till she perceived the
sounds sinking afar off, and an awful stillness round her, except that,
sometimes, the nightingale beguiled the silence with

     Liquid notes, that close the eye of day.

At length, she found herself near the avenue, which, on the night of her
father's arrival, Michael had attempted to pass in search of a house,
which was still nearly as wild and desolate as it had then appeared; for
the Count had been so much engaged in directing other improvements, that
he had neglected to give orders, concerning this extensive approach,
and the road was yet broken, and the trees overloaded with their own
luxuriance.

As she stood surveying it, and remembering the emotions, which she had
formerly suffered there, she suddenly recollected the figure, that had
been seen stealing among the trees, and which had returned no answer to
Michael's repeated calls; and she experienced somewhat of the fear, that
had then assailed her, for it did not appear improbable, that these deep
woods were occasionally the haunt of banditti. She, therefore, turned
back, and was hastily pursuing her way to the dancers, when she heard
steps approaching from the avenue; and, being still beyond the call of
the peasants on the green, for she could neither hear their voices, or
their music, she quickened her pace; but the persons following gained
fast upon her, and, at length, distinguishing the voice of Henri, she
walked leisurely, till he came up. He expressed some surprise at meeting
her so far from the company; and, on her saying, that the pleasant
moon-light had beguiled her to walk farther than she intended, an
exclamation burst from the lips of his companion, and she thought she
heard Valancourt speak! It was, indeed, he! and the meeting was such as
may be imagined, between persons so affectionate, and so long separated
as they had been.

In the joy of these moments, Emily forgot all her past sufferings, and
Valancourt seemed to have forgotten, that any person but Emily existed;
while Henri was a silent and astonished spectator of the scene.

Valancourt asked a thousand questions, concerning herself and Montoni,
which there was now no time to answer; but she learned, that her letter
had been forwarded to him, at Paris, which he had previously quitted,
and was returning to Gascony, whither the letter also returned, which,
at length, informed him of Emily's arrival, and on the receipt of which
he had immediately set out for Languedoc. On reaching the
monastery, whence she had dated her letter, he found, to his extreme
disappointment, that the gates were already closed for the night;
and believing, that he should not see Emily, till the morrow, he was
returning to his little inn, with the intention of writing to her, when
he was overtaken by Henri, with whom he had been intimate at Paris, and
was led to her, whom he was secretly lamenting that he should not see,
till the following day.

Emily, with Valancourt and Henri, now returned to the green, where the
latter presented Valancourt to the Count, who, she fancied, received him
with less than his usual benignity, though it appeared, that they were
not strangers to each other. He was invited, however, to partake of the
diversions of the evening; and, when he had paid his respects to the
Count, and while the dancers continued their festivity, he seated
himself by Emily, and conversed, without restraint. The lights, which
were hung among the trees, under which they sat, allowed her a more
perfect view of the countenance she had so frequently in absence
endeavoured to recollect, and she perceived, with some regret, that
it was not the same as when last she saw it. There was all its wonted
intelligence and fire; but it had lost much of the simplicity, and
somewhat of the open benevolence, that used to characterise it. Still,
however, it was an interesting countenance; but Emily thought she
perceived, at intervals, anxiety contract, and melancholy fix the
features of Valancourt; sometimes, too, he fell into a momentary musing,
and then appeared anxious to dissipate thought; while, at others, as he
fixed his eyes on Emily, a kind of sudden distraction seemed to
cross his mind. In her he perceived the same goodness and beautiful
simplicity, that had charmed him, on their first acquaintance. The bloom
of her countenance was somewhat faded, but all its sweetness remained,
and it was rendered more interesting, than ever, by the faint expression
of melancholy, that sometimes mingled with her smile.

At his request, she related the most important circumstances, that
had occurred to her, since she left France, and emotions of pity and
indignation alternately prevailed in his mind, when he heard how much
she had suffered from the villany of Montoni. More than once, when she
was speaking of his conduct, of which the guilt was rather softened,
than exaggerated, by her representation, he started from his seat,
and walked away, apparently overcome as much by self accusation as by
resentment. Her sufferings alone were mentioned in the few words, which
he could address to her, and he listened not to the account, which she
was careful to give as distinctly as possible, of the present loss of
Madame Montoni's estates, and of the little reason there was to expect
their restoration. At length, Valancourt remained lost in thought, and
then some secret cause seemed to overcome him with anguish. Again he
abruptly left her. When he returned, she perceived, that he had been
weeping, and tenderly begged, that he would compose himself. 'My
sufferings are all passed now,' said she, 'for I have escaped from the
tyranny of Montoni, and I see you well--let me also see you happy.'

Valancourt was more agitated, than before. 'I am unworthy of you,
Emily,' said he, 'I am unworthy of you;'--words, by his manner of
uttering which Emily was then more shocked than by their import. She
fixed on him a mournful and enquiring eye. 'Do not look thus on me,'
said he, turning away and pressing her hand; 'I cannot bear those
looks.'

'I would ask,' said Emily, in a gentle, but agitated voice, 'the meaning
of your words; but I perceive, that the question would distress you
now. Let us talk on other subjects. To-morrow, perhaps, you may be more
composed. Observe those moon light woods, and the towers, which
appear obscurely in the perspective. You used to be a great admirer
of landscape, and I have heard you say, that the faculty of deriving
consolation, under misfortune, from the sublime prospects, which neither
oppression, or poverty with-hold from us, was the peculiar blessing of
the innocent.' Valancourt was deeply affected. 'Yes,' replied he, 'I
had once a taste for innocent and elegant delights--I had once an
uncorrupted heart.' Then, checking himself, he added, 'Do you remember
our journey together in the Pyrenees?'

'Can I forget it?' said Emily.--'Would that I could!' he replied;--'that
was the happiest period of my life. I then loved, with enthusiasm,
whatever was truly great, or good.' It was some time before Emily could
repress her tears, and try to command her emotions. 'If you wish to
forget that journey,' said she, 'it must certainly be my wish to forget
it also.' She paused, and then added, 'You make me very uneasy; but this
is not the time for further enquiry;--yet, how can I bear to believe,
even for a moment, that you are less worthy of my esteem than formerly?
I have still sufficient confidence in your candour, to believe, that,
when I shall ask for an explanation, you will give it me.'--'Yes,' said
Valancourt, 'yes, Emily: I have not yet lost my candour: if I had, I
could better have disguised my emotions, on learning what were your
sufferings--your virtues, while I--I--but I will say no more. I did
not mean to have said even so much--I have been surprised into
the self-accusation. Tell me, Emily, that you will not forget that
journey--will not wish to forget it, and I will be calm. I would not
lose the remembrance of it for the whole earth.'

'How contradictory is this!' said Emily;--'but we may be overheard. My
recollection of it shall depend upon yours; I will endeavour to forget,
or to recollect it, as you may do. Let us join the Count.'--'Tell
me first,' said Valancourt, 'that you forgive the uneasiness I have
occasioned you, this evening, and that you will still love me.'--'I
sincerely forgive you,' replied Emily. 'You best know whether I shall
continue to love you, for you know whether you deserve my esteem. At
present, I will believe that you do. It is unnecessary to say,' added
she, observing his dejection, 'how much pain it would give me to believe
otherwise.--The young lady, who approaches, is the Count's daughter.'

Valancourt and Emily now joined the Lady Blanche; and the party, soon
after, sat down with the Count, his son, and the Chevalier Du Pont, at a
banquet, spread under a gay awning, beneath the trees. At the table also
were seated several of the most venerable of the Count's tenants, and
it was a festive repast to all but Valancourt and Emily. When the Count
retired to the chateau, he did not invite Valancourt to accompany him,
who, therefore, took leave of Emily, and retired to his solitary inn for
the night: meanwhile, she soon withdrew to her own apartment, where
she mused, with deep anxiety and concern, on his behaviour, and on the
Count's reception of him. Her attention was thus so wholly engaged, that
she forgot Dorothee and her appointment, till morning was far advanced,
when, knowing that the good old woman would not come, she retired, for a
few hours, to repose.

On the following day, when the Count had accidentally joined Emily in
one of the walks, they talked of the festival of the preceding evening,
and this led him to a mention of Valancourt. 'That is a young man of
talents,' said he; 'you were formerly acquainted with him, I perceive.'
Emily said, that she was. 'He was introduced to me, at Paris,' said the
Count, 'and I was much pleased with him, on our first acquaintance.' He
paused, and Emily trembled, between the desire of hearing more and the
fear of shewing the Count, that she felt an interest on the subject.
'May I ask,' said he, at length, 'how long you have known Monsieur
Valancourt?'--'Will you allow me to ask your reason for the question,
sir?' said she; 'and I will answer it immediately.'--'Certainly,' said
the Count, 'that is but just. I will tell you my reason. I cannot but
perceive, that Monsieur Valancourt admires you; in that, however, there
is nothing extraordinary; every person, who sees you, must do the same.
I am above using common-place compliments; I speak with sincerity. What
I fear, is, that he is a favoured admirer.'--'Why do you fear it, sir?'
said Emily, endeavouring to conceal her emotion.--'Because,' replied the
Count, 'I think him not worthy of your favour.' Emily, greatly agitated,
entreated further explanation. 'I will give it,' said he, 'if you will
believe, that nothing but a strong interest in your welfare could induce
me to hazard that assertion.'--'I must believe so, sir,' replied Emily.

'But let us rest under these trees,' said the Count, observing the
paleness of her countenance; 'here is a seat--you are fatigued.' They
sat down, and the Count proceeded. 'Many young ladies, circumstanced as
you are, would think my conduct, on this occasion, and on so short
an acquaintance, impertinent, instead of friendly; from what I have
observed of your temper and understanding, I do not fear such a return
from you. Our acquaintance has been short, but long enough to make me
esteem you, and feel a lively interest in your happiness. You deserve
to be very happy, and I trust that you will be so.' Emily sighed
softly, and bowed her thanks. The Count paused again. 'I am unpleasantly
circumstanced,' said he; 'but an opportunity of rendering you important
service shall overcome inferior considerations. Will you inform me of
the manner of your first acquaintance with the Chevalier Valancourt, if
the subject is not too painful?'

Emily briefly related the accident of their meeting in the presence of
her father, and then so earnestly entreated the Count not to hesitate in
declaring what he knew, that he perceived the violent emotion, against
which she was contending, and, regarding her with a look of tender
compassion, considered how he might communicate his information with
least pain to his anxious auditor.

'The Chevalier and my son,' said he, 'were introduced to each other,
at the table of a brother officer, at whose house I also met him, and
invited him to my own, whenever he should be disengaged. I did not then
know, that he had formed an acquaintance with a set of men, a disgrace
to their species, who live by plunder and pass their lives in continual
debauchery. I knew several of the Chevalier's family, resident at Paris,
and considered them as sufficient pledges for his introduction to my
own. But you are ill; I will leave the subject.'--'No, sir,' said Emily,
'I beg you will proceed: I am only distressed.'--'ONLY!' said the Count,
with emphasis; 'however, I will proceed. I soon learned, that these, his
associates, had drawn him into a course of dissipation, from which he
appeared to have neither the power, nor the inclination, to extricate
himself. He lost large sums at the gaming-table; he became infatuated
with play; and was ruined. I spoke tenderly of this to his friends, who
assured me, that they had remonstrated with him, till they were weary.
I afterwards learned, that, in consideration of his talents for play,
which were generally successful, when unopposed by the tricks of
villany,--that in consideration of these, the party had initiated him
into the secrets of their trade, and allotted him a share of their
profits.' 'Impossible!' said Emily suddenly; 'but--pardon me, sir, I
scarcely know what I say; allow for the distress of my mind. I must,
indeed, I must believe, that you have not been truly informed. The
Chevalier had, doubtless, enemies, who misrepresented him.'--'I should
be most happy to believe so,' replied the Count, 'but I cannot. Nothing
short of conviction, and a regard for your happiness, could have urged
me to repeat these unpleasant reports.'

Emily was silent. She recollected Valancourt's sayings, on the preceding
evening, which discovered the pangs of self-reproach, and seemed to
confirm all that the Count had related. Yet she had not fortitude enough
to dare conviction. Her heart was overwhelmed with anguish at the mere
suspicion of his guilt, and she could not endure a belief of it. After
a silence, the Count said, 'I perceive, and can allow for, your want
of conviction. It is necessary I should give some proof of what I have
asserted; but this I cannot do, without subjecting one, who is very dear
to me, to danger.'--'What is the danger you apprehend, sir?' said Emily;
'if I can prevent it, you may safely confide in my honour.'--'On your
honour I am certain I can rely,' said the Count; 'but can I trust your
fortitude? Do you think you can resist the solicitation of a favoured
admirer, when he pleads, in affliction, for the name of one, who
has robbed him of a blessing?'--'I shall not be exposed to such a
temptation, sir,' said Emily, with modest pride, 'for I cannot favour
one, whom I must no longer esteem. I, however, readily give my word.'
Tears, in the mean time, contradicted her first assertion; and she felt,
that time and effort only could eradicate an affection, which had been
formed on virtuous esteem, and cherished by habit and difficulty.

'I will trust you then,' said the Count, 'for conviction is necessary
to your peace, and cannot, I perceive, be obtained, without this
confidence. My son has too often been an eye-witness of the Chevalier's
ill conduct; he was very near being drawn in by it; he was, indeed,
drawn in to the commission of many follies, but I rescued him from guilt
and destruction. Judge then, Mademoiselle St. Aubert, whether a father,
who had nearly lost his only son by the example of the Chevalier, has
not, from conviction, reason to warn those, whom he esteems, against
trusting their happiness in such hands. I have myself seen the Chevalier
engaged in deep play with men, whom I almost shuddered to look upon. If
you still doubt, I will refer you to my son.'

'I must not doubt what you have yourself witnessed,' replied Emily,
sinking with grief, 'or what you assert. But the Chevalier has, perhaps,
been drawn only into a transient folly, which he may never repeat. If
you had known the justness of his former principles, you would allow for
my present incredulity.'

'Alas!' observed the Count, 'it is difficult to believe that, which
will make us wretched. But I will not sooth you by flattering and
false hopes. We all know how fascinating the vice of gaming is, and how
difficult it is, also, to conquer habits; the Chevalier might, perhaps,
reform for a while, but he would soon relapse into dissipation--for I
fear, not only the bonds of habit would be powerful, but that his morals
are corrupted. And--why should I conceal from you, that play is not his
only vice? he appears to have a taste for every vicious pleasure.'

The Count hesitated and paused; while Emily endeavoured to support
herself, as, with increasing perturbation, she expected what he might
further say. A long pause of silence ensued, during which he was visibly
agitated; at length, he said, 'It would be a cruel delicacy, that
could prevail with me to be silent--and I will inform you, that the
Chevalier's extravagance has brought him twice into the prisons of
Paris, from whence he was last extricated, as I was told upon authority,
which I cannot doubt, by a well-known Parisian Countess, with whom he
continued to reside, when I left Paris.'

He paused again; and, looking at Emily, perceived her countenance
change, and that she was falling from the seat; he caught her, but she
had fainted, and he called loudly for assistance. They were, however,
beyond the hearing of his servants at the chateau, and he feared
to leave her while he went thither for assistance, yet knew not how
otherwise to obtain it; till a fountain at no great distance caught his
eye, and he endeavoured to support Emily against the tree, under which
she had been sitting, while he went thither for water. But again he was
perplexed, for he had nothing near him, in which water could be brought;
but while, with increased anxiety, he watched her, he thought he
perceived in her countenance symptoms of returning life.

It was long, however, before she revived, and then she found herself
supported--not by the Count, but by Valancourt, who was observing her
with looks of earnest apprehension, and who now spoke to her in a tone,
tremulous with his anxiety. At the sound of his well-known voice, she
raised her eyes, but presently closed them, and a faintness again came
over her.

The Count, with a look somewhat stern, waved him to withdraw; but he
only sighed heavily, and called on the name of Emily, as he again held
the water, that had been brought, to her lips. On the Count's repeating
his action, and accompanying it with words, Valancourt answered him
with a look of deep resentment, and refused to leave the place, till she
should revive, or to resign her for a moment to the care of any person.
In the next instant, his conscience seemed to inform him of what had
been the subject of the Count's conversation with Emily, and indignation
flashed in his eyes; but it was quickly repressed, and succeeded by an
expression of serious anguish, that induced the Count to regard him with
more pity than resentment, and the view of which so much affected Emily,
when she again revived, that she yielded to the weakness of tears.
But she soon restrained them, and, exerting her resolution to appear
recovered, she rose, thanked the Count and Henri, with whom Valancourt
had entered the garden, for their care, and moved towards the chateau,
without noticing Valancourt, who, heart-struck by her manner, exclaimed
in a low voice--'Good God! how have I deserved this?--what has been
said, to occasion this change?'

Emily, without replying, but with increased emotion, quickened her
steps. 'What has thus disordered you, Emily?' said he, as he still
walked by her side: 'give me a few moments' conversation, I entreat
you;--I am very miserable!'

Though this was spoken in a low voice, it was overheard by the Count,
who immediately replied, that Mademoiselle St. Aubert was then too much
indisposed, to attend to any conversation, but that he would venture
to promise she would see Monsieur Valancourt on the morrow, if she was
better.

Valancourt's cheek was crimsoned: he looked haughtily at the Count,
and then at Emily, with successive expressions of surprise, grief and
supplication, which she could neither misunderstand, or resist, and she
said languidly--'I shall be better tomorrow, and if you wish to accept
the Count's permission, I will see you then.'

'See me!' exclaimed Valancourt, as he threw a glance of mingled pride
and resentment upon the Count; and then, seeming to recollect
himself, he added--'But I will come, madam; I will accept the Count's
PERMISSION.'

When they reached the door of the chateau, he lingered a moment, for
his resentment was now fled; and then, with a look so expressive of
tenderness and grief, that Emily's heart was not proof against it, he
bade her good morning, and, bowing slightly to the Count, disappeared.

Emily withdrew to her own apartment, under such oppression of heart as
she had seldom known, when she endeavoured to recollect all that the
Count had told, to examine the probability of the circumstances
he himself believed, and to consider of her future conduct towards
Valancourt. But, when she attempted to think, her mind refused controul,
and she could only feel that she was miserable. One moment, she sunk
under the conviction, that Valancourt was no longer the same, whom she
had so tenderly loved, the idea of whom had hitherto supported her
under affliction, and cheered her with the hope of happier days,--but
a fallen, a worthless character, whom she must teach herself to
despise--if she could not forget. Then, unable to endure this terrible
supposition, she rejected it, and disdained to believe him capable of
conduct, such as the Count had described, to whom she believed he had
been misrepresented by some artful enemy; and there were moments, when
she even ventured to doubt the integrity of the Count himself, and to
suspect, that he was influenced by some selfish motive, to break her
connection with Valancourt. But this was the error of an instant, only;
the Count's character, which she had heard spoken of by Du Pont and
many other persons, and had herself observed, enabled her to judge, and
forbade the supposition; had her confidence, indeed, been less, there
appeared to be no temptation to betray him into conduct so treacherous,
and so cruel. Nor did reflection suffer her to preserve the hope, that
Valancourt had been mis-represented to the Count, who had said, that he
spoke chiefly from his own observation, and from his son's experience.
She must part from Valancourt, therefore, for ever--for what of either
happiness or tranquillity could she expect with a man, whose tastes were
degenerated into low inclinations, and to whom vice was become habitual?
whom she must no longer esteem, though the remembrance of what he once
was, and the long habit of loving him, would render it very difficult
for her to despise him. 'O Valancourt!' she would exclaim, 'having been
separated so long--do we meet, only to be miserable--only to part for
ever?'

Amidst all the tumult of her mind, she remembered pertinaciously the
seeming candour and simplicity of his conduct, on the preceding night;
and, had she dared to trust her own heart, it would have led her to hope
much from this. Still she could not resolve to dismiss him for ever,
without obtaining further proof of his ill conduct; yet she saw no
probability of procuring it, if, indeed, proof more positive was
possible. Something, however, it was necessary to decide upon, and she
almost determined to be guided in her opinion solely by the manner, with
which Valancourt should receive her hints concerning his late conduct.

Thus passed the hours till dinner-time, when Emily, struggling against
the pressure of her grief, dried her tears, and joined the family
at table, where the Count preserved towards her the most delicate
attention; but the Countess and Mademoiselle Bearn, having looked, for a
moment, with surprise, on her dejected countenance, began, as usual,
to talk of trifles, while the eyes of Lady Blanche asked much of her
friend, who could only reply by a mournful smile.

Emily withdrew as soon after dinner as possible, and was followed by the
Lady Blanche, whose anxious enquiries, however, she found herself quite
unequal to answer, and whom she entreated to spare her on the subject
of her distress. To converse on any topic, was now, indeed, so extremely
painful to her, that she soon gave up the attempt, and Blanche left
her, with pity of the sorrow, which she perceived she had no power to
assuage.

Emily secretly determined to go to her convent in a day or two; for
company, especially that of the Countess and Mademoiselle Bearn, was
intolerable to her, in the present state of her spirits; and, in the
retirement of the convent, as well as the kindness of the abbess, she
hoped to recover the command of her mind, and to teach it resignation to
the event, which, she too plainly perceived, was approaching.

To have lost Valancourt by death, or to have seen him married to
a rival, would, she thought, have given her less anguish, than a
conviction of his unworthiness, which must terminate in misery to
himself, and which robbed her even of the solitary image her heart so
long had cherished. These painful reflections were interrupted, for a
moment, by a note from Valancourt, written in evident distraction
of mind, entreating, that she would permit him to see her on the
approaching evening, instead of the following morning; a request, which
occasioned her so much agitation, that she was unable to answer it. She
wished to see him, and to terminate her present state of suspense, yet
shrunk from the interview, and, incapable of deciding for herself, she,
at length, sent to beg a few moments' conversation with the Count in his
library, where she delivered to him the note, and requested his advice.
After reading it, he said, that, if she believed herself well enough
to support the interview, his opinion was, that, for the relief of both
parties, it ought to take place, that evening.

'His affection for you is, undoubtedly, a very sincere one,' added the
Count; 'and he appears so much distressed, and you, my amiable friend,
are so ill at ease--that the sooner the affair is decided, the better.'

Emily replied, therefore, to Valancourt, that she would see him, and
then exerted herself in endeavours to attain fortitude and composure,
to bear her through the approaching scene--a scene so afflictingly the
reverse of any, to which she had looked forward!




VOLUME 4