e blushed, looked down, and
was ashamed to have spoken so freely.

Edmund went on. “My most ardent wishes are, that the fair Emma may
reserve her heart and hand till a certain person, a friend of mine, is
at liberty to solicit them; whose utmost ambition is, first to deserve,
and then to obtain them.”

“Your friend, Sir!” said Lady Emma! her brow clouded, her eye
disdainful.

Edmund proceeded. “My friend is so particularly circumstanced that he
cannot at present with propriety ask for Lady Emma’s favour; but as soon
as he has gained a cause that is yet in suspence, he will openly declare
his pretensions, and if he is unsuccessful, he will then condemn himself
to eternal silence.”

 Lady Emma knew not what to think of this declaration; she hoped, she
feared, she meditated; but her attention was too strongly excited to
be satisfied without some gratification; After a pause, she pursued the
subject.

“And this friend of yours, sir, of what degree and fortune is he?”

Edmund smiled; but, commanding his emotion, he replied, “His birth is
noble, his degree and fortune uncertain.”

Her countenance fell, she sighed; he proceeded. “It is utterly
impossible,” said he, “for any man of inferior degree to aspire to Lady
Emma’s favour; her noble birth, the dignity of her beauty and virtues,
must awe and keep at their proper distance, all men of inferior degree
and merit; they may admire, they may revere; but they must not presume
to approach too near, lest their presumption should meet with its
punishment.”

“Well, sir,” said she, suddenly; “and so this friend of yours has
commissioned you to speak in his behalf?”

“He has, Madam.”

“Then I must tell you, that I think his assurance is very great, and
yours not much less.”

“I am sorry for that, Madam.”

“Tell him, that I shall reserve my heart and hand for the man to whom my
father shall bid me give them.”

“Very well, Lady; I am certain my lord loves you too well to dispose of
them against your inclination.”

“How do you know that, sir? But tell him, that the man that hopes for my
favour must apply to my lord for his.”

“That is my friend’s intention--his resolution, I should say--as soon as
he can do it with propriety; and I accept your permission for him to do
so.”

“My permission did you say? I am astonished at your assurance! tell me
no more of your friend; But perhaps you are pleading for Wenlock all
this time; It is all one to me; only, say no more.”

“Are you offended with me, madam?”

“No matter, sir.”

“Yes, it is.”

“I am surprised at you, Edmund.”

“I am surprised at my own temerity; but, forgive me.”

“It does not signify; good bye ty’e, sir.”

“Don’t leave me in anger, madam; I cannot bear that. Perhaps I may not
see you again for a long time.”

 He looked afflicted; she turned back.  “I do forgive you, Edmund; I
was concerned for you; but, it seems, you are more concerned for every
body than for yourself.” She sighed; “Farewell!” said she.

Edmund gazed on her with tenderness; he approached her, he just touched
her hand; his heart was rising to his lips, but he recollected his
situation; he checked himself immediately; he retired back, he sighed
deeply, bowed low, and hastily quitted her.

The lady turning into another walk, he reached the house first, and went
up again to his chamber; he threw himself upon his knees; prayed for a
thousand blessings upon every one of the family of his benefactor, and
involuntarily wept at mentioning the name of the charming Emma, whom he
was about to leave abruptly, and perhaps for ever. He then endeavoured
to compose himself, and once more attended the Baron; wished him a good
night; and withdrew to his chamber, till he was called upon to go again
to the haunted apartment.

He came down equipped for his journey, and went hastily for fear of
observation; he paid his customary devotions, and soon after Oswald
tapped at the door. They conferred together upon the interesting subject
that engrossed their attention, until Joseph came to them, who brought
the rest of Edmund’s baggage, and some refreshment for him before he
set out. Edmund promised to give them the earliest information of his
situation and success. At the hour of twelve they heard the same
groans as the night before in the lower apartment; but, being somewhat
familiarized to it, they were not so strongly affected. Oswald crossed
himself, and prayed for the departed soul; he also prayed for Edmund,
and recommended him to the Divine protection. He then arose, and
embraced that young man; who, also, took a tender leave of his friend
Joseph. They then went, with silence and caution, through a long
gallery; they descended the stairs in the same manner; they crossed the
hall in profound silence, and hardly dared to breathe, lest they should
be overheard; they found some difficulty in opening one of the folding
doors, which at last they accomplished; they were again in jeopardy at
the outward gate. At length they conveyed him safely into the stables;
there they again embraced him, and prayed for his prosperity.

He then mounted his horse, and set forward to Wyatt’s cottage; he
hallooed at the door, and was answered from within. In a few minutes
John came out to him.

“What, is it you, Master Edmund?”

“Hush!” said he; “not a word of who I am; I go upon private business,
and would not wish to be known.”

“If you will go forward, sir, I will soon overtake you.” He did so; and
they pursued their journey to the north. In the mean time, Oswald
and Joseph returned in silence into the house; they retired to their
respective apartments without hearing or being heard by any one.

About the dawn of day Oswald intended to lay his packets in the way of
those to whom they were addressed; after much contrivance he determined
to take a bold step, and, if he were discovered, to frame some excuse.
Encouraged by his late success, he went on tip-toe into Master William’s
chamber, placed a letter upon his pillow, and withdrew unheard. Exulting
in his heart, he attempted the Baron’s apartment, but found it fastened
within. Finding this scheme frustrated, he waited till the hour the
Baron was expected down to breakfast, and laid the letter and the key of
the haunted apartment upon the table. Soon after, he saw the Baron
enter the breakfast room; he got out of sight, but staid within call,
preparing himself for a summons. The Baron sat down to breakfast; he saw
a letter directed to himself--he opened it, and to his great surprise,
read as follows:--

“The guardian of the haunted apartment to Baron Fitz-Owen. To thee I
remit the key of my charge, until the right owner shall come, who will
both discover and avenge my wrongs; then, woe be to the guilty!--But
let the innocent rest in peace. In the mean time, let none presume
to explore the secrets of my apartment, lest they suffer for their
temerity.”

The Baron was struck with amazement at the letter. He took up the key,
examined it, then laid it down, and took up the letter; he was in such
confusion of thought, he knew not what to do or say for several minutes.
At length he called his servants about him; the first question he asked
was--

“Where is Edmund?”

“They could not tell.

“Has he been called?”

“Yes, my Lord, but nobody answered, and the key was not in the door.”

“Where is Joseph?”

“Gone into the stables.”

“Where is father Oswald?”

“In his study.”

“Seek him, and desire him to come hither.”

By the time the Baron had read the letter over again, he came.

He had been framing a steady countenance to answer to all
interrogatories. As he came in he attentively observed the Baron, whose
features were in strong agitation; as soon as he saw Oswald, he spoke as
one out of breath.

“Take that key, and read this letter!”

He did so, shrugged up his shoulders, and remained silent.

“Father,” said my lord, “what think you of this letter?”

“It is a very surprising one.”

“The contents are alarming. Where is Edmund?”

“I do not know.”

“Has nobody seen him?”

“Not that I know of.”

“Call my sons, my kinsmen, my servants.”

The servants came in.

“Have any of you seen or heard of Edmund?”

“No,” was the answer.

“Father, step upstairs to my sons and kinsmen, and desire them to come
down immediately.”

Oswald withdrew; and went, first, to Mr. William’s chamber.

“My dear sir, you must come to my lord now directly--he has something
extraordinary to communicate to you.”

“And so have I, father--see what I have found upon my pillow!”

“Pray, sir, read it to me before you shew it to any body; my lord
is alarmed too much already, and wants nothing to increase his
consternation.”

William read his letter, while Oswald looked as if he was an utter
stranger to the contents, which were these:--

“Whatever may be heard or seen, let the seal of friendship be upon thy
lips. The peasant Edmund is no more; but there still lives a man who
hopes to acknowledge, and repay, the Lord Fitz-Owen’s generous care
and protection; to return his beloved William’s vowed affection, and to
claim his friendship on terms of equality.”

“What,” said William, “can this mean?”

“It is not easy to say,” replied Oswald.

“Can you tell what is the cause of this alarm?”

“I can tell you nothing, but that my lord desires to see you
directly--pray make haste down; I must go up to your brothers and
kinsmen, nobody knows what to think, or believe.”

Master William went down stairs, and Father Oswald went to the
malcontents. As soon as he entered the outward door of their apartment,
Mr. Wenlock called out. “Here comes the friend--now for some new
proposal!”

“Gentlemen,” said Oswald, “my lord desires your company immediately in
the breakfast parlour.”

“What! to meet your favourite Edmund, I suppose?” said Mr. Wenlock.

“No, sir.”

“What, then, is the matter?” said Sir Robert.

“Something very extraordinary has happened, gentlemen. Edmund is not to
be found--he disappeared from the haunted apartment, the key of which
was conveyed to my lord in a strange manner, with a letter from an
unknown hand; my lord is both surprised and concerned, and wishes to
have your opinion and advice on the occasion.”

“Tell him,” said Sir Robert, “we will wait upon him immediately.”

As Oswald went away, he heard Wenlock say, “So Edmund is gone, it is no
matter how, or whither.”

Another said, “I hope the ghost has taken him out of the way.” The rest
laughed at the conceit, as they followed Oswald down stairs. They found
the Baron, and his son William, commenting upon the key and the letter.
My lord gave them to Sir Robert, who looked on them with marks of
surprise and confusion.

The Baron addressed him--

“Is not this a very strange affair? Son Robert, lay aside your ill
humours, and behave to your father with the respect and affection his
tenderness deserves from you, and give me your advice and opinion on
this alarming subject.”

“My Lord,” said Sir Robert, “I am as much confounded as yourself--I
can give no advice--let my cousins see the letter--let us have their
opinion.”

They read it in turn--they were equally surprised; but when it came into
Wenlock’s hand, he paused and meditated some minutes.

At length--“I am indeed surprised, and still more concerned, to see my
lord and uncle the dupe of an artful contrivance; and, if he will permit
me, I shall endeavour to unriddle it, to the confusion of all that are
concerned in it.”

“Do so, Dick,” said my lord, “and you shall have my thanks for it.”

“This letter,” said he, “I imagine to be the contrivance of Edmund, or
some ingenious friend of his, to conceal some designs they have against
the peace of this family, which has been too often disturbed upon that
rascal’s account.”

“But what end could be proposed by it?” said the Baron.

“Why, one part of the scheme is to cover Edmund’s departure, that is
clear enough; for the rest, we can only guess at it--perhaps he may be
concealed somewhere in that apartment, from whence he may rush out in
the night, and either rob or murder us; or, at least, alarm and terrify
the family.”

The Baron smiled.

“You shoot beyond the mark, sir, and overshoot yourself, as you have
done before now; you shew only your inveteracy against that poor lad,
whom you cannot mention with temper. To what purpose should he shut
himself up there, to be starved?”

“Starved! no, no! he has friends in this house (looking at Oswald), who
will not suffer him to want anything; those who have always magnified
his virtues, and extenuated his faults, will lend a hand to help him in
time of need; and, perhaps, to assist his ingenious contrivances.”

Oswald shrugged up his shoulders, and remained silent.

“This is a strange fancy of yours, Dick,” said my lord; “but I am willing
to pursue it,--first, to discover what you drive at; and, secondly, to
satisfy all that are here present of the truth or falsehood of it, that
they may know what value to set upon your sagacity hereafter. Let us all
go over that apartment together; and let Joseph be called to attend us
thither.”

Oswald offered to call him, but Wenlock stopped him. “No, father,” said
he, “you must stay with us; we want your ghostly counsel and advice;
Joseph shall have no private conference with you.”

“What mean you,” said Oswald, “to insinuate to my lord against me or
Joseph? But your ill-will spares nobody. It will one day be known who is
the disturber of the peace of this family; I wait for that time, and am
silent.”

Joseph came; when he was told whither they were going, he looked hard at
Oswald. Wenlock observed them.

“Lead the way, father,” said he, “and Joseph shall follow us.”

Oswald smiled.

“We will go where Heaven permits us,” said he; “alas! the wisdom of man
can neither hasten, nor retard, its decrees.”

They followed the father up stairs, and went directly to the haunted
apartment. The Baron unlocked the door; he bid Joseph open the shutters,
and admit the daylight, which had been excluded for many years. They
went over the rooms above stairs, and then descended the staircase, and
through the lower rooms in the same manner. However, they overlooked the
closet, in which the fatal secret was concealed; the door was covered
with tapestry, the same as the room, and united so well that it seemed
but one piece. Wenlock tauntingly desired Father Oswald to introduce
them to the ghost. The father, in reply, asked them where they should
find Edmund. “Do you think,” said he, “that he lies hid in my pocket, or
in Joseph’s?”

“‘Tis no matter,” answered he; “thoughts are free.”

“My opinion of you, Sir,” said Oswald, “is not founded upon thoughts--I
judge of men by their actions,--a rule, I believe, it will not suit you
to be tried by.”

“None of your insolent admonitions, father!” returned Wenlock; “this is
neither the time nor the place for them.”


“That is truer than you are aware of, sir; I meant not to enter into the
subject just now.”

“Be silent,” said my Lord.

“I shall enter into this subject with you hereafter--then look you be
prepared for it. In the mean time, do you, Dick Wenlock, answer to my
questions:--Do you think Edmund is concealed in this apartment?”

“No, sir.”

“Do you think there is any mystery in it?”

“No, my lord.”

“Is it haunted, think you?”

“No, I think not.”

“Should you be afraid to try?”

“In what manner, my lord?”

“Why, you have shewn your wit upon the subject, and I mean to show your
courage;--you, and Jack Markham your confident, shall sleep here three
nights, as Edmund has done before.”

“Sir,” said Sir Robert, “for what purpose? I should be glad to
understand why.”

“I have my reasons, sir, as well as your kinsmen there. No reply, Sirs!
I insist upon being obeyed in this point. Joseph, let the beds be well
aired, and every thing made agreeable to the gentlemen; If there is any
contrivance to impose upon me, they, I am sure, will have pleasure in
detecting it; and, if not, I shall obtain my end in making these rooms
habitable. Oswald, come with me; and the rest may go where they list
till dinner-time.”

The Baron went with Oswald into the parlour.

“Now tell me, father,” said he, “do you disapprove what I have done?”

“Quite the contrary, my lord,” said he; “I entirely approve it.”

“But you do not know all my reasons for it. Yesterday Edmund’s behaviour
was different from what I have ever seen it--he is naturally frank and
open in all his ways; but he was then silent, thoughtful, absent; he
sighed deeply, and once I saw tears stand in his eyes. Now, I do
suspect there is something uncommon in that apartment--that Edmund has
discovered the secret; and, fearing to disclose it, he is fled away from
the house. As to this letter, perhaps he may have written it to
hint that there is more than he dares reveal; I tremble at the hints
contained in it, though I shall appear to make light of it. But I and
mine are innocent; and if Heaven discloses the guilt of others, I ought
to adore and submit to its decrees.”

“That is prudently and piously resolved, my lord; let us do our duty,
and leave events to Heaven.”

“But, father, I have a further view in obliging my kinsmen to sleep
there:--if any thing should appear to them, it is better that it should
only be known to my own family; if there is nothing in it, I shall put
to the proof the courage and veracity of my two kinsmen, of whom I think
very indifferently. I mean shortly to enquire into many things I have
heard lately to their disadvantage; and, if I find them guilty, they
shall not escape with impunity.”

“My lord,” said Oswald, “you judge like yourself; I wish you to make
enquiry concerning them, and believe the result will be to their
confusion, and your Lordship will be enabled to re-establish the peace
of your family.”

During this conversation, Oswald was upon his guard, lest any thing
should escape that might create suspicion. He withdrew as soon as he
could with decency, and left the Baron meditating what all these things
should mean; he feared there was some misfortune impending over his
house, though he knew not from what cause.

He dined with his children and kinsmen, and strove to appear cheerful;
but a gloom was perceivable through his deportment. Sir Robert was
reserved and respectful; Mr. William was silent and attentive; the rest
of the family dutifully assiduous to my Lord; only Wenlock and Markham
were sullen and chagrined. The Baron detained the young men the whole
afternoon; he strove to amuse and to be amused; he shewed the greatest
affection and parental regard to his children, and endeavoured to
conciliate their affections, and engage their gratitude by kindness.
Wenlock and Markham felt their courage abate as the night approached;
At the hour of nine, old Joseph came to conduct them to the haunted
apartment; they took leave of their kinsmen, and went up stairs with
heavy hearts.

They found the chamber set in order for them, and a table spread with
provision and good liquor to keep up their spirits.

“It seems,” said Wenlock, “that your friend Edmund was obliged to you
for his accommodations here.”

“Sir,” said Joseph, “his accommodations were bad enough the first night;
but, afterwards, they were bettered by my lord’s orders.”

“Owing to your officious cares?” said Wenlock.

“I own it,” said Joseph, “and I am not ashamed of it.”

“Are you not anxious to know what is become of him?” said Markham.

“Not at all, sir; I trust he is in the best protection; so good a young
man as he is, is safe everywhere.”

“You see, cousin Jack,” said Wenlock, “how this villain has stole the
hearts of my uncle’s servants; I suppose this canting old fellow knows
where he is, if the truth were known.”

“Have you any further commands for me, gentlemen?” said the old man.

“No, not we.”

“Then I am ordered to attend my lord, when you have done with me.”

“Go, then, about your business.”

Joseph went away, glad to be dismissed.

“What shall we do, cousin Jack,” said Wenlock, “to pass away the
time?--it is plaguy dull sitting here.”

“Dull enough,” said Markham, “I think the best thing we can do, is to go
to bed and sleep it away.”

“Faith!” says Wenlock, “I am in no disposition to sleep. Who would have
thought the old man would have obliged us to spend the night here?”

“Don’t say us, I beg of you; it was all your own doing,” replied
Markham.

“I did not intend he should have taken me at my word.”

“Then you should have spoken more cautiously. I have always been
governed by you, like a fool as I am; you play the braggart, and I
suffer for it; But they begin to see through your fine-spun arts and
contrivances, and I believe you will meet with your deserts one day or
other.”

“What now? do you mean to affront me, Jack? Know, that some are born
to plan, others to execute; I am one of the former, thou of the latter.
Know your friend, or--”

“Or what?” replied Markham; “do you mean to threaten me? If you do!”

“What then?” said Wenlock.

“Why, then, I will try which of us two is the best man, sir!”

Upon this Markham arose, and put himself into a posture of defence.
Wenlock perceiving he was serious in his anger, began to soothe him;
he persuaded, he flattered, he promised great things if he would be
composed. Markham was sullen, uneasy, resentful; whenever he spoke, it
was to upbraid Wenlock with his treachery and falsehood. Wenlock
tried all his eloquence to get him into a good humour, but in vain; he
threatened to acquaint his uncle with all that he knew, and to exculpate
himself at the other’s expence. Wenlock began to find his choler rise;
they were both almost choaked with rage; and, at length, they both rose
with a resolution to fight.

As they stood with their fists clenched, on a sudden they were alarmed
with a dismal groan from the room underneath. They stood like statues
petrified by fear, yet listening with trembling expectation. A second
groan increased their consternation; and, soon after, a third completed
it. They staggered to a seat, and sunk down upon it, ready to faint.
Presently, all the doors flew open, a pale glimmering light appeared at
the door, from the staircase, and a man in complete armour entered the
room. He stood, with one hand extended, pointing to the outward door;
they took the hint, and crawled away as fast as fear would let them;
they staggered along the gallery, and from thence to the Baron’s
apartment, where Wenlock sunk down in a swoon, and Markham had just
strength enough to knock at the door.

The servant who slept in the outward room alarmed his lord.

Markham cried out, “For Heaven’s sake, let us in!”

Upon hearing his voice, the door was opened, and Markham approached
his Uncle in such an attitude of fear, as excited a degree of it in the
Baron. He pointed to Wenlock, who was with some difficulty recovered
from the fit he was fallen into; the servant was terrified, he rung the
alarm-bell; the servants came running from all parts to their Lord’s
apartment; The young gentlemen came likewise, and presently all was
confusion, and the terror was universal. Oswald, who guessed the
business, was the only one that could question them. He asked several
times,

“What is the matter?”

Markham, at last, answered him, “We have seen the ghost!”

All regard to secrecy was now at an end; the echo ran through the whole
family--“They have seen the ghost!”

The Baron desired Oswald to talk to the young men, and endeavour to
quiet the disturbance. He came forward; he comforted some, he rebuked
others; he had the servants retire into the outward room. The Baron,
with his sons and kinsmen, remained in the bed-chamber.

“It is very unfortunate,” said Oswald, “that this affair should be made
so public; surely these young men might have related what they had seen,
without alarming the whole family. I am very much concerned upon my
lord’s account.”

“I thank you, father,” said the Baron; “but prudence was quite
overthrown here. Wenlock was half dead, and Markham half distracted; the
family were alarmed without my being able to prevent it. But let us hear
what these poor terrified creatures say.”

Oswald demanded, “What have you seen, gentlemen?”

“The ghost!” said Markham.

“In what form did it appear?”

“A man in armour.”

“Did it speak to you?”

“No.”

“What did it do to terrify you so much?”

“It stood at the farthest door, and pointed to the outward door, as if
to have us leave the room; we did not wait for a second notice, but came
away as fast as we could.”

“Did it follow you?”

“No.”

“Then you need not have raised such a disturbance.”

Wenlock lifted up his head, and spoke--

“I believe, father, if you had been with us, you would not have stood
upon ceremonies any more than we did. I wish my lord would send you to
parley with the ghost; for, without doubt, you are better qualified than
we.”

“My Lord,” said Oswald, “I will go thither, with your permission; I will
see that every thing is safe, and bring the key back to you; Perhaps
this may help to dispel the fears that have been raised--at least, I
will try to do it.”

“I thank you, father, for your good offices--do as you please.”

Oswald went into the outward room. “I am going,” said he, “to shut up
the apartment. The young gentlemen have been more frightened than they
had occasion for; I will try to account for it. Which of you will go
with me?”

They all drew back, except Joseph, who offered to bear him company. They
went into the bedroom in the haunted apartment, and found every thing
quiet there. They put out the fire, extinguished the lights, locked
the door, and brought away the key. As they returned, “I thought how it
would be,” said Joseph.

“Hush! not a word,” said Oswald; “you find we are suspected of
something, though they know not what. Wait till you are called upon, and
then we will both speak to purpose.” They carried the key to the Baron.

“All is quiet in the apartment,” said Oswald, “as we can testify.”

“Did you ask Joseph to go with you,” said the Baron, “or did he offer
himself?”

“My Lord, I asked if any body would go with me, and they all declined it
but he; I thought proper to have a witness beside myself, for whatever
might be seen or heard.”

“Joseph, you were servant to the late Lord Lovel; what kind of man was
he?”

“A very comely man, please your lordship.”

“Should you know him if you were to see him?”

“I cannot say, my lord.”

“Would you have any objection to sleep a night in that apartment?”

“I beg,”--“I hope,”--“I beseech your lordship not to command me to
do it!”

“You are then afraid; why did you offer yourself to go thither?”

“Because I was not so much frightened as the rest.”

“I wish you would lie a night there; but I do not insist upon it.”

“My lord, I am a poor ignorant old man, not fit for such an undertaking;
beside, if I should see the ghost, and if it should be the person of my
master, and if it should tell me any thing, and bid me keep it secret, I
should not dare to disclose it; and then, what service should I do your
lordship?”

“That is true, indeed,” said the Baron.

“This speech,” said Sir Robert, “is both a simple and an artful one. You
see, however, that Joseph is not a man for us to depend upon; he regards
the Lord Lovel, though dead, more than Lord Fitz-Owen, living; he calls
him his master, and promises to keep his secrets. What say you, father,
Is the ghost your master, or your friend? Are you under any obligation
to keep his secrets?”

“Sir,” said Oswald, “I answer as Joseph does; I would sooner die than
discover a secret revealed in that manner.”

“I thought as much,” said Sir Robert; “there is a mystery in Father
Oswald’s behaviour, that I cannot comprehend.”

“Do not reflect upon the father,” said the Baron; “I have no cause to
complain of him; perhaps the mystery may be too soon explained; but let
us not anticipate evils. Oswald and Joseph have spoken like good men;
I am satisfied with their answers; let us, who are innocent, rest in
peace; and let us endeavour to restore peace in the family; and do you,
father, assist us.”

“With my best services,” said Oswald. He called the servants in. “Let
nothing be mentioned out of doors,” said he, “of what has lately passed
within, especially in the east apartment; the young gentlemen had not so
much reason to be frightened as they apprehended; a piece of furniture
fell down in the rooms underneath, which made the noise that alarmed
them so much; but I can certify that all things in the rooms are in
quiet, and there is nothing to fear. All of you attend me in the chapel
in an hour; do your duties, put your trust in God, and obey your Lord,
and you will find every thing go right as it used to do.”

They dispersed; the sun rose, the day came on, and every thing went on
in the usual course; but the servants were not so easily satisfied; they
whispered that something was wrong, and expected the time that should
set all right. The mind of the Baron was employed in meditating upon
these circumstances, that seemed to him the forerunners of some great
events; he sometimes thought of Edmund; he sighed for his expulsion, and
lamented the uncertainty of his fate; but, to his family, he appeared
easy and satisfied.

From the time of Edmund’s departure, the fair Emma had many uneasy
hours; she wished to enquire after him, but feared to shew any
solicitude concerning him. The next day, when her brother William came
into her apartment, she took courage to ask a question.

“Pray, brother, can you give any guess what is become of Edmund?”

“No,” said he, with a sigh; “why do you ask me?”

“Because, my dear William, I should think if any body knew, it must be
you; and I thought he loved you too well to leave you in ignorance. But
don’t you think he left the castle in a very strange manner?”

“I do, my dear; there is a mystery in every circumstance of his
departure; Nevertheless (I will trust you with a secret), he did not
leave the castle without making a distinction in my favour.”

“I thought so,” said she; “but you might tell me what you know about
him.”

“Alas, my dear Emma! I know nothing. When I saw him last, he seemed
a good deal affected, as if he were taking leave of me; and I had a
foreboding that we parted for a longer time than usual.”

“Ah! so had I,” said she, “when he parted from me in the garden.”

“What leave did he take of you, Emma?”

She blushed, and hesitated to tell him all that passed between them;
but he begged, persuaded, insisted; and, at length, under the strongest
injunctions of secrecy, she told him all.

He said, “That Edmund’s behaviour on that occasion was as mysterious
as the rest of his conduct; but, now you have revealed your secret, you
have a right to know mine.”

He then gave her the letter he found upon his pillow; she read it with
great emotion.

“Saint Winifred assist me!” said she; “what can I think? ‘The peasant
Edmund is no more, but there lives one,’--that is to my thinking, Edmund
lives, but is no peasant.”

“Go on, my dear,” said William; “I like your explanation.”

“Nay, brother, I only guess; but what think you?”

“I believe we think alike in more than one respect, that he meant to
recommend no other person than himself to your favour; and, if he were
indeed of noble birth, I would prefer him to a prince for a husband to
my Emma!”

“Bless me!” said she, “do you think it possible that he should be of
either birth or fortune?”

“It is hard to say what is impossible! we have proof that the east
apartment is haunted. It was there that Edmund was made acquainted with
many secrets, I doubt not: and, perhaps, his own fate may be involved in
that of others. I am confident that what he saw and heard there, was the
cause of his departure. We must wait with patience the unravelling this
intricate affair; I believe I need not enjoin your secrecy as to what I
have said; your heart will be my security.”

“What mean you, brother?”

“Don’t affect ignorance, my dear; you love Edmund, so do I; it is
nothing to be ashamed of. It would have been strange, if a girl of your
good sense had not distinguished a swan among a flock of geese.”

“Dear William, don’t let a word of this escape you; but you have taken
a weight off my heart. You may depend that I will not dispose of my hand
or heart till I know the end of this affair.”

William smiled: “Keep them for Edmund’s friend; I shall rejoice to see
him in a situation to ask them.”

“Hush, my brother! not a word more; I hear footsteps.”

They were her eldest brother’s, who cam