nning towards him; and, leaping over the style, stood
still a while to recover his breath.

“What is the matter, sir?” said Edmund; “your looks bespeak some tidings
of importance.”

With a look of tender concern and affection, the youth pressed his hand
and spoke--

“My dear Edmund, you must come home with me directly; your old enemies
have united to ruin you with my father; my brother Robert has declared
that he thinks there will be no peace in our family till you are
dismissed from it, and told my father, he hoped he would not break with
his kinsmen rather than give up Edmund.”

“But what do they lay to my charge?” said Edmund.

“I cannot rightly understand,” answered William, “for they make a great
mystery of it; something of great consequence, they say; but they will
not tell me what: However, my father has told them that they must bring
their accusation before your face, and he will have you answer them
publicly. I have been seeking you this hour, to inform you of this, that
you might be prepared to defend yourself against your accusers.”

“God reward you, sir,” said Edmund, “for all your goodness to me! I
see they are determined to ruin me if possible: I shall be compelled to
leave the castle; but, whatever becomes of me, be assured you shall have
no cause to blush for your kindness and partiality to your Edmund.”

“I know it, I am sure of it,” said William; “and here I swear to you, as
Jonathan did to David, I beseech Heaven to bless me, as my friendship to
you shall be steady and inviolable!”

“Only so long as I shall deserve so great a blessing,” interrupted
Edmund.

“I know your worth and honour,” continued William; “and such is my
confidence in your merit, that I firmly believe Heaven designs you for
something extraordinary; and I expect that some great and unforeseen
event will raise you to the rank and station to which you appear to
belong: Promise me, therefore, that whatever may be your fate you will
preserve the same friendship for me that I bear to you.”

Edmund was so much affected that he could not answer but in broken
sentences.

“Oh my friend, my master! I vow, I promise, my heart promises!”

He kneeled down with clasped hands, and uplifted eyes. William kneeled
by him, and they invoked the Supreme to witness to their friendship,
and implored His blessing upon it. They then rose up and embraced each
other, while tears of cordial affection bedewed their cheeks.

As soon as they were able to speak, Edmund conjured his friend not to
expose himself to the displeasure of his family out of kindness to him.

“I submit to the will of Heaven,” said he; “I wait with patience its
disposal of me; if I leave the castle, I will find means to inform you
of my fate and fortunes.”

“I hope,” said William, “that things may yet be accommodated; but do not
take any resolution, let us act as occasions arise.”

In this manner these amiable youths conferred, till they arrived at the
castle. The Baron was sitting in the great hall, on a high chair with a
footstep before, with the state and dignity of a judge; before him stood
Father Oswald, as pleading the cause for himself and Edmund. Round the
Baron’s chair stood his eldest son and his kinsmen, with their principal
domestics. The old servant, Joseph, at some distance, with his head
leaning forward, as listening with the utmost attention to what passed.
Mr. William approached the chair. “My Lord, I have found Edmund, and
brought him to answer for himself.”

“You have done well,” said the Baron. “Edmund, come hither; you are
charged with some indiscretions, for I cannot properly call them crimes:
I am resolved to do justice between you and your accusers; I shall
therefore hear you as well as them; for no man ought to be condemned
unheard.”

“My lord,” said Edmund, with equal modesty and intrepidity, “I demand my
trial; if I shall be found guilty of any crimes against my Benefactor,
let me be punished with the utmost rigour; But if, as I trust, no such
charge can be proved against me, I know your goodness too well to doubt
that you will do justice to me, as well as to others; and if it should
so happen that by the misrepresentations of my enemies (who have
long sought my ruin privately, and now avow it publicly), if by their
artifices your lordship should be induced to think me guilty, I would
submit to your sentence in silence, and appeal to another tribunal.”

“See,” said Mr. Wenlock, “the confidence of the fellow! he already
supposes that my lord must be in the wrong if he condemns him; and then
this meek creature will appeal to another tribunal. To whose will he
appeal? I desire he may be made to explain himself.”

“That I will immediately,” said Edmund, “without being compelled. I only
meant to appeal to Heaven that best knows my innocence.”

“‘Tis true,” said the Baron, “and no offence to any one; man can only
judge by appearances, but Heaven knows the heart; Let every one of
you bear this in mind, that you may not bring a false accusation, nor
justify yourselves by concealing the truth. Edmund, I am informed that
Oswald and you have made very free with me and my family, in some of
your conversations; you were heard to censure me for the absurdity of
building a new apartment on the west side of the castle, when there was
one on the east side uninhabited. Oswald said, that apartment was shut
up because it was haunted; that some shocking murder had been committed
there; adding many particulars concerning Lord Lovel’s family, such as
he could not know the truth of, and, if he had known, was imprudent
to reveal. But, further, you complained of ill-treatment here; and
mentioned an intention to leave the castle, and seek your fortune
elsewhere. I shall examine into all these particulars in turn. At
present I desire you, Edmund, to relate all that you can remember of
the conversation that passed between you and Oswald in the wood last
Monday.”

“Good God!” said Edmund, “is it possible that any person could put such
a construction upon so innocent a conversation?”

“Tell me then,” said the Baron, “the particulars of it.”

“I will, my lord, as nearly as my memory will allow me.” Accordingly he
related most of the conversation that passed in the wood; but, in the
part that concerned the family of Lovel, he abbreviated as much as
possible. Oswald’s countenance cleared up, for he had done the same
before Edmund came. The Baron called to his eldest son.

“You hear, Sir Robert, what both parties say; I have questioned them
separately; neither of them knew what the other would answer, yet their
accounts agree almost to a word.”

“I confess they do so,” answered Sir Robert; “but, sir, it is very bold
and presuming for them to speak of our family affairs in such a manner;
if my uncle, Lord Lovel, should come to know it, he would punish them
severely; and, if his honour is reflected upon, it becomes us to resent
and to punish it.” Here Mr. Wenlock broke out into passion, and offered
to swear to the truth of his accusation.

“Be silent, Dick,” said the Baron; “I shall judge for myself. I
protest,” said he to Sir Robert, “I never heard so much as Oswald has now
told me concerning the deaths of Lord and Lady Lovel; I think it is
best to let such stories alone till they die away of themselves. I had,
indeed, heard of an idle story of the east apartment’s being haunted,
when first I came hither, and my brother advised me to shut it up till
it should be forgotten; but what has now been said, has suggested a
thought that may make that apartment useful in future. I have thought of
a punishment for Edmund that will stop the mouth of his accusers for
the present; and, as I hope, will establish his credit with every body.
Edmund, will you undertake this adventure for me?”

“What adventure, my Lord,” said Edmund? “There is nothing I would not
undertake to shew my gratitude and fidelity to you. As to my courage, I
would shew that at the expence of my malicious accusers, if respect to
my Lord’s blood did not tie up my hands; as I am situated, I beg it may
be put to the proof in whatever way is most for my master’s service.”

“That is well said,” cried the Baron; “as to your enemies, I am thinking
how to separate you from them effectually; of that I shall speak
hereafter. I am going to try Edmund’s courage; he shall sleep three
nights in the east apartment, that he may testify to all whether it be
haunted or not; afterwards I will have that apartment set in order, and
my eldest son shall take it for his own; it will spare me some expence,
and answer my purpose as well, or better; Will you consent, Edmund?”

“With all my heart, my Lord,” said Edmund, “I have not wilfully offended
God or man; I have, therefore, nothing to fear.”

“Brave boy!” said my Lord; “I am not deceived in you, nor shall you
be deceived in your reliance on me. You shall sleep in that apartment
to-night, and to-morrow I will have some private talk with you. Do you,
Oswald, go with me; I want to have some conversation with you. The rest
of you, retire to your studies and business; I will meet you at dinner.”

Edmund retired to his own chamber, and Oswald was shut up with the
Baron; he defended Edmund’s cause and his own, and laid open as much as
he knew of the malice and designs of his enemies. The Baron expressed
much concern at the untimely deaths of Lord and Lady Lovel, and
desired Oswald to be circumspect in regard to what he had to say of the
circumstances attending them; adding, that he was both innocent and
ignorant of any treachery towards either of them. Oswald excused himself
for his communications to Edmund, saying, they fell undesignedly into
the subject, and that he mentioned it in confidence to him only.

The Baron sent orders to the young men to come to dinner; but they
refused to meet Edmund at table; accordingly he ate in the steward’s
apartment. After dinner, the Baron tried to reconcile his kinsmen to
Edmund; but found it impossible. They saw their designs were laid open;
and, judging of him by themselves, thought it impossible to forgive or
be forgiven. The Baron ordered them to keep in separate apartments; he
took his eldest son for his own companion, as being the most reasonable
of the malcontents; and ordered his kinsmen to keep their own apartment,
with a servant to watch their motions. Mr. William had Oswald for his
companion. Old Joseph was bid to attend on Edmund; to serve him
at supper; and, at the hour of nine, to conduct him to the haunted
apartment. Edmund desired that he might have a light and his sword,
lest his enemies should endeavour to surprise him. The Baron thought his
request reasonable, and complied with it.

There was a great search to find the key of the apartment; at last it
was discovered by Edmund, himself, among a parcel of old rusty keys in
a lumber room. The Baron sent the young men their suppers to their
respective apartments. Edmund declined eating, and desired to be
conducted to his apartment. He was accompanied by most of the servants
to the door of it; they wished him success, and prayed for him as if he
had been going to execution.

The door was with great difficulty unlocked, and Joseph gave Edmund a
lighted lamp, and wished him a good night; he returned his good wishes
to them all with the utmost cheerfulness, took the key on the inside of
the door, and dismissed them.

He then took a survey of his chamber; the furniture, by long neglect,
was decayed and dropping to pieces; the bed was devoured by the moths,
and occupied by the rats, who had built their nests there with impunity
for many generations. The bedding was very damp, for the rain had forced
its way through the ceiling; he determined, therefore, to lie down in
his clothes. There were two doors on the further side of the room, with
keys in them; being not at all sleepy, he resolved to examine them;
he attempted one lock, and opened it with ease; he went into a large
dining-room, the furniture of which was in the same tattered condition;
out of this was a large closet with some books in it, and hung round
with coats of arms, with genealogies and alliances of the house of
Lovel; he amused himself here some minutes, and then returned into the
bed-chamber.

He recollected the other door, and resolved to see where it led to; the
key was rusted into the lock, and resisted his attempts; he set the lamp
on the ground, and, exerting all his strength, opened the door, and at
the same instant the wind of it blew out the lamp, and left him in utter
darkness. At the same moment he heard a hollow rustling noise, like that
of a person coming through a narrow passage. Till this moment not one
idea of fear had approached the mind of Edmund; but, just then, all the
concurrent circumstances of his situation struck upon his heart, and
gave him a new and disagreeable sensation. He paused a while; and,
recollecting himself, cried out aloud. “What should I fear? I have not
wilfully offended God or man; why then should I doubt protection? But I
have not yet implored the divine assistance; how then can I expect
it!” Upon this, he kneeled down and prayed earnestly, resigning himself
wholly to the will of heaven; while he was yet speaking, his courage
returned, and he resumed his usual confidence; again he approached the
door from whence the noise proceeded; he thought he saw a glimmering
light upon a staircase before him. “If,” said he, “this apartment is
haunted, I will use my endeavours to discover the cause of it; and if
the spirit appears visibly, I will speak to it.”

He was preparing to descend the staircase, when he heard several knocks
at the door by which he first entered the room; and, stepping backward,
the door was clapped to with great violence. Again fear attacked him,
but he resisted it, and boldly cried out, “Who is there?”

A voice at the outer door answered, “It’s I; Joseph, your friend!”

“What do you want?” said Edmund.

“I have brought you some wood to make a fire,” said Joseph.

“I thank you kindly,” said Edmund; “but my lamp is gone out; I will try
to find the door, however.”

After some trouble he found, and opened it; and was not sorry to see his
friend Joseph, with a light in one hand, a flagon of beer in the other,
and a fagot upon his shoulder. “I come,” said the good old man, “to
bring you something to keep up your spirits; the evening is cold; I know
this room wants airing; and beside that, my master, I think your present
undertaking requires a little assistance.”

“My good friend,” said Edmund, “I never shall be able to deserve or
requite your kindness to me.”

“My dear sir, you always deserved more than I could do for you; and I
think I shall yet live to see you defeat the designs of your enemies,
and acknowledge the services of your friends.”

“Alas!” said Edmund, “I see little prospect of that!”

“I see,” said Joseph, “something that persuades me you are designed for
great things; and I perceive that things are working about to some great
end: have courage, my Master, my heart beats strangely high upon your
account!”

“You make me smile,” said Edmund.

“I am glad to see it, sir; may you smile all the rest of your life!”

“I thank your honest affection,” returned Edmund, “though it is too
partial to me. You had better go to bed, however; if it is known that
you visit me here, it will be bad for us both.”

“So I will presently; but, please God, I will come here again to-morrow
night, when all the family are a-bed; and I will tell you some things
that you never yet heard.”

“But pray tell me,” said Edmund, “where does that door lead to?”

“Upon a passage that ends in a staircase that leads to the lower rooms;
and there is likewise a door out of that passage into the dining-room.”

“And what rooms are there below stairs,” said Edmund?

“The same as above,” replied he.

“Very well; then I wish you a good night, we will talk further
to-morrow.”

“Aye, to-morrow night; and in this place, my dear master.”

“Why do you call me your master? I never was, nor ever can be, your
master.”

“God only knows that,” said the good old man; “good-night, and heaven
bless you!”

“Good-night, my worthy friend!”

Joseph withdrew, and Edmund returned to the other door, and attempted
several times to open it in vain; his hands were benumbed and tired; at
length he gave over. He made a fire in the chimney, placed the lamp on a
table, and opened one of the window-shutters to admit the day-light;
he then recommended himself to the Divine protection, and threw himself
upon the bed; he presently fell asleep, and continued in that state,
till the sun saluted him with his orient beams through the window he had
opened.

As soon as he was perfectly awake, he strove to recollect his dreams.
He thought that he heard people coming up the staircase that he had a
glimpse of; that the door opened, and there entered a warrior, leading a
lady by the hand, who was young and beautiful, but pale and wan; The man
was dressed in complete armour, and his helmet down. They approached
the bed; they undrew the curtains. He thought the man said, “Is this our
child?” The woman replied, “It is; and the hour approaches that he shall
be known for such.” They then separated, and one stood on each side
of the bed; their hands met over his head, and they gave him a solemn
benediction. He strove to rise and pay them his respects, but they
forbad him; and the lady said, “Sleep in peace, oh my Edmund! for
those who are the true possessors of this apartment are employed in
thy preservation; sleep on, sweet hope of a house that is thought past
hope!”

Upon this, they withdrew, and went out at the same door by which they
entered, and he heard them descend the stairs. After this, he followed
a funeral as chief mourner; he saw the whole procession, and heard the
ceremonies performed. He was snatched away from this mournful scene to
one of a contrary kind, a stately feast, at which he presided; and
he heard himself congratulated as a husband, and a father; his
friend William sat by his side; and his happiness was complete. Every
succeeding idea was happiness without allay; and his mind was not idle
a moment till the morning sun awakened him. He perfectly remembered his
dreams, and meditated on what all these things should portend. “Am I
then,” said he, “not Edmund Twyford, but somebody of consequence in
whose fate so many people are interested? Vain thought, that must have
arisen from the partial suggestion of my two friends, Mr. William and
old Joseph.”

He lay thus reflecting, when a servant knocked at his door, and told him
it was past six o’clock, and that the Baron expected him to breakfast in
an hour. He rose immediately; paid his tribute of thanks to heaven for
its protection, and went from his chamber in high health and spirits. He
walked in the garden till the hour of breakfast, and then attended the
Baron.

“Good morrow, Edmund!” said he; “how have you rested in your new
apartment?”

“Extremely well, my lord,” answered he.

“I am glad to hear it,” said the Baron; “but I did not know your
accommodations were so bad, as Joseph tells me they are.”

“‘Tis of no consequence,” said Edmund; “if they were much worse, I could
dispense with them for three nights.”

“Very well,” said the Baron; “you are a brave lad; I am satisfied with
you, and will excuse the other two nights.”

“But, my lord, I will not be excused; no one shall have reason to
suspect my courage; I am determined to go through the remaining nights
upon many accounts.”

“That shall be as you please,” said my Lord. “I think of you as you
deserve; so well, that I shall ask your advice by and by in some affairs
of consequence.”

“My life and services are yours, my lord; command them freely.”

“Let Oswald be called in,” said my Lord; “he shall be one of our
consultation.” He came; the servants were dismissed; and the Baron spoke
as follows:

“Edmund, when first I took you into my family, it was at the request of
my sons and kinsmen; I bear witness to your good behaviour, you have not
deserved to lose their esteem; but, nevertheless, I have observed
for some years past, that all but my son William have set their faces
against you; I see their meanness, and I perceive their motives: but
they are, and must be, my relations; and I would rather govern them by
love, than fear. I love and esteem your virtues: I cannot give you up
to gratify their humours. My son William has lost the affections of the
rest, for that he bears to you; but he has increased my regard for him;
I think myself bound in honour to him and you to provide for you; I
cannot do it, as I wished, under my own roof. If you stay here, I see
nothing but confusion in my family; yet I cannot put you out of it
disgracefully. I want to think of some way to prefer you, that you may
leave this house with honour; and I desire both of you to give me your
advice in this matter. If Edmund will tell me in what way I can employ
him to his own honour and my advantage, I am ready to do it; let him
propose it, and Oswald shall moderate between us.”

Here he stopped; and Edmund, whose sighs almost choked him, threw
himself at the Baron’s feet, and wet his hand with his tears: “Oh, my
noble, generous benefactor! do you condescend to consult such a one as
me upon the state of your family? does your most amiable and beloved son
incur the ill-will of his brothers and kinsmen for my sake? What am I,
that I should disturb the peace of this noble family? Oh, my lord, send
me away directly! I should be unworthy to live, if I did not earnestly
endeavour to restore your happiness. You have given me a noble
education, and I trust I shall not disgrace it. If you will recommend
me, and give me a character, I fear not to make my own fortune.”

The Baron wiped his eyes; “I wish to do this, my child, but in what way?”

“My lord,” said Edmund, “I will open my heart to you. I have served with
credit in the army, and I should prefer a soldier’s life.”

“You please me well,” said the Baron; “I will send you to France, and
give you a recommendation to the Regent; he knows you personally, and
will prefer you, for my sake, and for your own merit.”

“My lord, you overwhelm me with your goodness! I am but your creature,
and my life shall be devoted to your service.”

“But,” said the Baron, “how to dispose of you till the spring?”

“That,” said Oswald, “may be thought of at leisure; I am glad that you
have resolved, and I congratulate you both.” The Baron put an end to the
conversation by desiring Edmund to go with him into the menage to see
his horses. He ordered Oswald to acquaint his son William with all that
had passed, and to try to persuade the young men to meet Edmund and
William at dinner.

The Baron took Edmund with him into his menage to see some horses he had
lately purchased; while they were examining the beauties and defects
of these noble and useful animals, Edmund declared that he preferred
Caradoc, a horse he had broke himself, to any other in my lord’s
stables. “Then,” said the Baron, “I will give him to you; and you shall
go upon him to seek your fortune.” He made new acknowledgments for this
gift, and declared he would prize it highly for the giver’s sake. “But
I shall not part with you yet,” said my lord; “I will first carry all my
points with these saucy boys, and oblige them to do you justice.”

“You have already done that,” said Edmund; “and I will not suffer any
of your Lordship’s blood to undergo any farther humiliation upon my
account. I think, with humble submission to your better judgment, the
sooner I go hence the better.”

While they were speaking, Oswald came to them, and said, that the young
men had absolutely refused to dine at the table, if Edmund was present.
“‘Tis well,” said the Baron; “I shall find a way to punish their
contumacy hereafter; I will make them know that I am the master here.
Edmund and you, Oswald, shall spend the day in my apartment above
stairs. William shall dine with me alone; and I will acquaint him with
our determination; my son Robert, and his cabal, shall be prisoners in
the great parlour. Edmund shall, according to his own desire, spend this
and the following night in the haunted apartment; and this for his sake,
and my own; for if I should now contradict my former orders, it would
subject us both to their impertinent reflections.”

He then took Oswald aside, and charged him not to let Edmund go out of
his sight; for if he should come in the way of those implacable enemies,
he trembled for the consequences. He then walked back to the stables,
and the two friends returned into the house.

They had a long conversation on various subjects; in the course of it,
Edmund acquainted Oswald with all that had passed between him and Joseph
the preceding night, the curiosity he had raised in him, and his promise
to gratify it the night following.

“I wish,” said Oswald, “you would permit me to be one of your party.”

“How can that be?” said Edmund; “we shall be watched, perhaps; and, if
discovered, what excuse can you make for coming there? Beside, if it
were known, I shall be branded with the imputation of cowardice; and,
though I have borne much, I will not promise to bear that patiently.”

“Never fear,” replied Oswald, “I will speak to Joseph about it; and,
after prayers are over and the family gone to bed, I will steal away
from my own chamber and come to you. I am strongly interested in your
affairs; and I cannot be easy unless you will receive me into your
company; I will bind myself to secrecy in any manner you shall enjoin.”


“Your word is sufficient,” said Edmund; “I have as much reason to trust
you, father, as any man living; I should be ungrateful to refuse you any
thing in my power to grant; But suppose the apartment should really be
haunted, would you have resolution enough to pursue the adventure to a
discovery?”

“I hope so,” said Oswald; “but have you any reason to believe it is?”

“I have,” said Edmund; “but I have not opened my lips upon this subject
to any creature but yourself. This night I purpose, if Heaven permit,
to go all over the rooms; and, though I had formed this design, I will
confess that your company will strengthen my resolution. I will have no
reserves to you in any respect; but I must put a seal upon your lips.”

Oswald swore secrecy till he should be permitted to disclose the
mysteries of that apartment; and both of them waited, in solemn
expectation, the event of the approaching night.

In the afternoon Mr. William was allowed to visit his friend. An
affecting interview passed between them. He lamented the necessity of
Edmund’s departure; and they took a solemn leave of each other, as if
they foreboded it would be long ere they should meet again.

About the same hour as the preceding evening, Joseph came to conduct
Edmund to his apartment.

“You will find better accommodations than you had last night,” said he,
“and all by my lord’s own order.”

“I every hour receive some new proof of his goodness,” said Edmund.

When they arrived, he found a good fire in the chamber, and a table
covered with cold meats, and a flagon of strong beer.

“Sit down and get your supper, my dear Master,” said Joseph: “I must
attend my Lord; but as soon as the family are gone to bed, I will visit
you again.”

“Do so,” said Edmund; “but first, see Father Oswald; he has something to
say to you. You may trust him, for I have no reserves to him.”

“Well, Sir, I will see him if you desire it; and I will come to you as
soon as possible.” So saying, he went his way, and Edmund sat down to
supper.

After a moderate refreshment, he kneeled down, and prayed with the
greatest fervency. He resigned himself to the disposal of Heaven: “I
am nothing,” said he, “I desire to be nothing but what thou, O Lord,
pleasest to make me. If it is thy will that I should return to my former
obscurity, be it obeyed with cheerfulness; and, if thou art pleased to
exalt me, I will look up to thee, as the only fountain of honour and
dignity.” While he prayed, he felt an enlargement of heart beyond what
he had ever experienced before; all idle fears were dispersed, and his
heart glowed with divine love and affiance;--he seemed raised above the
world and all its pursuits. He continued wrapt up in mental devotion,
till a knocking at the door obliged him to rise, and let in his two
friends, who came without shoes, and on tiptoe, to visit him.

“Save you, my son!” said the friar; “you look cheerful and happy.”

“I am so, father,” said Edmund; “I have resigned myself to the disposal
of Heaven, and I find my heart strengthened above what I can express.”

“Heaven be praised!” said Oswald: “I believe you are designed for great
things, my son.”

“What! do you too encourage my ambition?” says Edmund; “strange
concurrence of circumstances!--Sit down, my friends; and do you, my
good Joseph, tell me the particulars you promised last night.” They drew
their chairs round the fire, and Joseph began as follows:--

“You have heard of the untimely death of the late Lord Lovel, my noble
and worthy master; perhaps you may have also heard that, from that time,
this apartment was haunted. What passed the other day, when my Lord
questioned you both on this head, brought all the circumstances fresh
into my mind. You then said, there were suspicions that he came not
fairly to his end. I trust you both, and will speak what I know of it.
There was a person suspected of this murder; and whom do you think it
was?”

“You must speak out,” said Oswald.

“Why then,” said Joseph, “it was the present Lord Lovel.”

“You speak my thoughts,” said Oswald; “but proceed to the proofs.”

“I will,” said Joseph.

“From the time that my lord’s death was reported, there were strange
whisperings and consultations between the new lord and some of the
servants; there was a deal of private business carried on in this
apartment. Soon after, they gave out that my poor lady was distracted;
but she threw out strong expressions that savoured nothing of madness.
She said, that the ghost of her departed lord had appeared to her, and
revealed the circumstances of this murder. None of the servants, but
one, were permitted to see her. At this very time, Sir Walter, the new
lord, had the cruelty to offer love to her; he urged her to marry him;
and one of her women overheard her say, she would sooner die than give
her hand to the man who caused the death of her Lord; Soon after
this, we were told my Lady was dead. The Lord Lovel made a public and
sumptuous funeral for her.”

“That is true,” said Oswald; “for I was a novice, and assisted at it.”

“Well,” says Joseph, “now comes my part of the story. As I was coming
home from the burial, I overtook Roger our ploughman. Said he, What
think you of this burying?--‘What should I think,’ said I, ‘but that we
have lost the best Master and Lady that we shall ever know?’ ‘God, He
knows,’ quoth Roger, ‘whether they be living or dead; but if ever I
saw my Lady in my life, I saw her alive the night they say she died.’ I
tried to convince him that he was mistaken; but he offered to take his
oath, that the very night they said she died, he saw her come out at the
garden gate into the fields; that she often stopped, like a person in
pain, and then went forward again until he lost sight of her. Now it is
certain that her time was out, and she expected to lie down every day;
and they did not pretend that she died in child-bed. I thought upon
what I heard, but nothing I said. Roger told the same story to another
servant; so he was called to an account, the story was hushed up, and
the foolish fellow said, he was verily persuaded it was her ghost that
he saw. Now you must take notice that, from this time, they began to
talk about, that this apartment was troubled; and not only this, but
at last the new Lord could not sleep in quiet in his own room; and this
induced him to sell the castle to his brother-in-law, and get out of
this country as fast as possible. He took most of the servants away with
him, and Roger among the rest. As for me, they thought I knew nothing,
and so they left me behind; but I was neither blind nor deaf, though I
could hear, and see, and say nothing.”

“This is a dark story,” said Oswald.

“It is so,” said Edmund; “but why should Joseph seem to think it
concerns me in particular?”

“Ah, dear Sir,” said Joseph, “I must tell you, though I never uttered it
to mortal man 