al, and bade him open the lists, and deliver their
weapons to the combatants.

While the marshal was arranging the combatants and their followers,
Edmund approached his friend and patron; he put one knee to the ground,
he embraced his knees with the strongest emotions of grief and anxiety.
He was dressed in complete armour, with his visor down; his device was
a hawthorn, with a graft of the rose upon it, the motto--This is not my
true parent; but Sir Philip bade him take these words--E fructu arbor
cognoscitur.

Sir Philip embraced the youth with strong marks of affection. “Be
composed, my child!” said he; “I have neither guilt, fear, nor doubt
in me; I am so certain of success, that I bid you be prepared for the
consequence.”

Zadisky embraced his friend, he comforted Edmund, he suggested every
thing that could confirm his hopes of success.

The marshal waited to deliver the spear to Sir Philip; he now presented
it with the usual form.

“Sir, receive your lance, and God defend the right!”

Sir Philip answered, “Amen!” in a voice that was heard by all present.

He next presented his weapon to Lord Lovel with the same sentence, who
likewise answered “Amen!” with a good courage. Immediately the lists
were cleared, and the combatants began to fight.

They contended a long time with equal skill and courage; at length
Sir Philip unhorsed his antagonist. The judges ordered, that either he
should alight, or suffer his enemy to remount; he chose the former, and
a short combat on foot ensued. The sweat ran off their bodies with the
violence of the exercise. Sir Philip watched every motion of his enemy,
and strove to weary him out, intending to wound, but not to kill him,
unless obliged for his own safety.

He thrust his sword through his left arm, and demanded, whether he would
confess the fact? Lord Lovel enraged, answered, he would die sooner.
Sir Philip then passed the sword through his body twice, and Lord Lovel
fell, crying out that he was slain.

“I hope not,” said Sir Philip, “for I have a great deal of business for
you to do before you die: confess your sins, and endeavour to atone for
them, as the only ground to hope for pardon.”

Lord Lovel replied, “You are the victor, use your good fortune
generously!”

Sir Philip took away his sword, and then waved it over his head, and
beckoned for assistance. The judges sent to beg Sir Philip to spare the
life of his enemy.

“I will,” said he, “upon condition that he will make an honest
confession.”

Lord Lovel desired a surgeon and a confessor.

“You shall have both,” said Sir Philip; “but you must first answer me a
question or two. Did you kill your kinsman or not?”

“It was not my hand that killed him,” answered the wounded man.

“It was done by your own order, however? You shall have no assistance
till you answer this point.”

“It was,” said he, “and Heaven is just!”

“Bear witness all present,” said Sir Philip; “he confesses the fact!”

He then beckoned Edmund, who approached.

“Take off your helmet,” said he; “look on that youth, he is the son of
your injured kinsman.”

“It is himself!” said the Lord Lovel, and fainted away.

Sir Philip then called for a surgeon and a priest, both of which Lord
Graham had provided; the former began to bind up his wounds, and his
assistants poured a cordial into his mouth. “Preserve his life, if it be
possible,” said Sir Philip; “for much depends upon it.”

He then took Edmund by the hand, and presented him to all the company.
“In this young man,” said he, “you see the true heir of the house of
Lovel! Heaven has in its own way made him the instrument to discover
the death of his parents. His father was assassinated by order of that
wicked man, who now receives his punishment; his mother was, by his
cruel treatment, compelled to leave her own house; she was delivered in
the fields, and perished herself in seeking a shelter for her infant.
I have sufficient proofs of every thing I say, which I am ready to
communicate to every person who desires to know the particulars. Heaven,
by my hand, has chastised him; he has confessed the fact I accuse him
of, and it remains that he make restitution of the fortune and honours
he hath usurped so long.”

Edmund kneeled, and with uplifted hands returned thanks to Heaven, that
his noble friend and champion was crowned with victory. The lords and
gentlemen gathered round them, they congratulated them both; while Lord
Lovel’s friends and followers were employed in taking care of him. Lord
Clifford took Sir Philip’s hand.

“You have acted with so much honour and prudence, that it is
presumptuous to offer you advice; but what mean you to do with the
wounded man?”

“I have not determined,” said he; “I thank you for the hint, and beg
your advice how to proceed.”

“Let us consult Lord Graham,” replied he.

Lord Graham insisted upon their going all to his castle: “There,” said
he, “you will have impartial witnesses of all that passes.” Sir Philip
was unwilling to give so much trouble. The Lord Graham protested he
should be proud to do any service to so noble a gentleman. Lord Clifford
enforced his request, saying, it was better upon all accounts to keep
their prisoner on this side the borders till they saw what turn his
health would take, and to keep him safely till he had settled his
worldly affairs.

This resolution being taken, Lord Graham invited the wounded man and
his friends to his castle, as being the nearest place where he could
be lodged and taken proper care of, it being dangerous to carry him
further. They accepted the proposal with many acknowledgements; and,
having made a kind of litter of boughs, they all proceeded to Lord
Graham’s castle, where they put Lord Lovel to bed, and the surgeon
dressed his wounds, and desired he might be kept quiet, not knowing at
present whether they were dangerous or not.

About an hour after, the wounded man complained of thirst; he asked
for the surgeon, and enquired if his life was in danger? The surgeon
answered him doubtfully. He asked--

“Where is Sir Philip Harclay?”

“In the castle.”

“Where is that young man whom he calls the heir of Lovel?”

“He is here, too.”

“Then I am surrounded with my enemies. I want to speak to one of my own
servants, without witnesses; let one be sent to me.”

The surgeon withdrew, and acquainted the gentlemen below. “He shall not
speak to any man,” said Sir Philip, “but in my presence.” He went with
him into the sick man’s room. Upon the sight of Sir Philip, he seemed in
great agitation.

“Am I not allowed to speak with my own servant?” said he.

“Yes, sir, you may; but not without witnesses.”

“Then I am a prisoner, it seems?”

“No, not so, sir; but some caution is necessary at present. But compose
yourself, I do not wish for your death.”

“Then why did you seek it? I never injured you.”

“Yes, you have, in the person of my friend, and I am only the instrument
of justice in the hand of Heaven; endeavour to make atonement while
life is spared to you. Shall I send the priest to you? perhaps he
may convince you of the necessity of restitution, in order to obtain
forgiveness of your sins.”

Sir Philip sent for the priest and the surgeon, and obliged the servant
to retire with him. “I leave you, sir, to the care of these gentlemen;
and whenever a third person is admitted, I will be his attendant; I will
visit you again within an hour.”

He then retired, and consulted his friends below; they were of opinion
that no time should be lost. “You will then,” said he, “accompany me
into the sick man’s apartment in an hour’s time.”

Within the hour, Sir Philip, attended by Lord Clifford and Lord Graham,
entered the chamber. Lord Lovel was in great emotion; the priest stood
on one side of the bed, the surgeon on the other; the former exhorted
him to confess his sins, the other desired he might be left to his
repose. Lord Lovel seemed in great anguish of mind; he trembled, and was
in the utmost confusion. Sir Philip intreated him, with the piety of
a confessor, to consider his soul’s health before that of his body. He
then asked Sir Philip, by what means he knew that he was concerned in
the death of his kinsman?

“Sir,” replied he, “it was not merely by human means this fact was
discovered. There is a certain apartment in the Castle of Lovel, that
has been shut up these one and twenty years, but has lately been opened
and examined into.”

“O Heaven!” exclaimed he, “then Geoffry must have betrayed me!”

“No, sir, he has not; it was revealed in a very extraordinary manner to
that youth whom it most concerns.”

“How can he be the heir of Lovel?”

“By being the son of that unfortunate woman, whom you cruelly obliged to
leave her own house, to avoid being compelled to wed the murderer of her
husband: we are not ignorant, moreover, of the fictitious funeral you
made for her. All is discovered, and you will not tell us any more than
we know already; but we desire to have it confirmed by your confession.”


“The judgments of Heaven are fallen upon me!” said Lord Lovel. “I am
childless, and one is arisen from the grave to claim my inheritance.”

“Nothing, then, hinders you to do justice and make restitution; it is
for the ease of your conscience; and you have no other way of making
atonement for all the mischief you have done.”

“You know too much,” said the criminal, “and I will relate what you do
not know.”

“You may remember,” proceeded he, “that I saw you once at my uncle’s
house?”

“I well remember it.”

“At that time my mind was disturbed by the baleful passion of envy; it
was from that root all my bad actions sprung.”

“Praise be to God!” said the good priest; “he hath touched your heart
with true contrition, and you shew the effect of his mercies; you will
do justice, and you will be rewarded by the gift of repentance unto
salvation.”

Sir Philip desired the penitent to proceed.

“My kinsman excelled me in every kind of merit, in the graces of person
and mind, in all his exercises, and in every accomplishment. I was
totally eclipsed by him, and I hated to be in his company; but what
finished my aversion, was his addressing the lady upon whom I had
fixed my affections. I strove to rival him there, but she gave him the
preference that, indeed, was only his due; but I could not bear to see,
or acknowledge, it.

“The most bitter hatred took possession of my breast, and I vowed to
revenge the supposed injury as soon as opportunity should offer. I
buried my resentment deep in my heart, and outwardly appeared to rejoice
at his success. I made a merit of resigning my pretensions to him, but
I could not bear to be present at his nuptials; I retired to my father’s
seat, and brooded over my revenge in secret. My father died this year,
and soon after my uncle followed him; within another year my kinsman was
summoned to attend the king on his Welch expedition.

“As soon as I heard he was gone from home, I resolved to prevent his
return, exulting in the prospect of possessing his title, fortune, and
his lady. I hired messengers, who were constantly going and coming to
give me intelligence of all that passed at the castle; I went there soon
after, under pretence of visiting my kinsman. My spies brought me
an account of all that happened; one informed me of the event of the
battle, but could not tell whether my rival was living or dead; I hoped
the latter, that I might avoid the crime I meditated. I reported his
death to his Lady, who took it very heavily.

“Soon after a messenger arrived with tidings that he was alive and well,
and had obtained leave to return home immediately.

“I instantly dispatched my two emissaries to intercept him on the way.
He made so much haste to return, that he was met within a mile of his
own castle; he had out-rode his servants, and was alone. They killed
him, and drew him aside out of the highway. They then came to me with
all speed, and desired my orders; it was then about sunset. I sent
them back to fetch the dead body, which they brought privately into the
castle: they tied it neck and heels, and put it into a trunk, which they
buried under the floor in the closet you mentioned. The sight of the
body stung me to the heart; I then felt the pangs of remorse, but it was
too late; I took every precaution that prudence suggested to prevent the
discovery; but nothing can be concealed from the eye of Heaven.

“From that fatal hour I have never known peace, always in fear of
something impending to discover my guilt, and to bring me to shame; at
length I am overtaken by justice. I am brought to a severe reckoning
here, and I dread to meet one more severe hereafter.”

“Enough,” said the priest; “you have done a good work, my son! trust in
the Lord; and, now this burden is off your mind, the rest will be made
easy to you.”

Lord Lovel took a minute’s repose, and then went on.

“I hope by the hint you gave, Sir Philip, the poor lady is yet alive?”

“No, sir, she is not; but she died not till after she brought forth a
son, whom Heaven made its instrument to discover and avenge the death of
both his parents.”

“They are well avenged!” said he. “I have no children to lament for
me; all mine have been taken from me in the bloom of youth; only one
daughter lived to be twelve years old; I intended her for a wife for one
of my nephews, but within three months I have buried her.” He sighed,
wept, and was silent.

The gentlemen present lifted up their hands and eyes to Heaven in
silence.

“The will of Heaven be obeyed!” said the priest. “My penitent hath
confessed all; what more would you require?”

“That he make atonement,” said Sir Philip; “that he surrender the title
and estate to the right heir, and dispose of his own proper fortune to
his nearest relations, and resign himself to penitence and preparation
for a future state. For this time I leave him with you, father, and will
join my prayers with yours for his repentance.”

So saying, he left the room, and was followed by the Barons and the
surgeon; the priest alone remaining with him. As soon as they were out
of hearing, Sir Philip questioned the surgeon concerning his patient’s
situation; who answered, that at present he saw no signs of immediate
danger, but he could not yet pronounce that there was none.

“If he were mortally wounded,” said he, “he could not be so well, nor
speak so long without faintness; and it is my opinion that he will soon
recover, if nothing happens to retard the cure.”

“Then,” said Sir Philip, “keep this opinion from him; for I would
suffer the fear of death to operate on him until he hath performed some
necessary acts of justice. Let it only be known to these noblemen, upon
whose honour I can rely, and I trust they will approve my request to
you, sir.”

“I join in it,” said Lord Clifford, “from the same motives.”

“I insist upon it,” said Lord Graham; “and I can answer for my surgeon’s
discretion.”

“My lords,” said the surgeon, “you may depend on my fidelity; and,
after what I have just heard, my conscience is engaged in this noble
gentleman’s behalf, and I will do every thing in my power to second your
intentions.”

“I thank you, sir,” said Sir Philip, “and you may depend on my gratitude
in return. I presume you will sit up with him to-night; if any danger
should arise, I desire to be called immediately; but, otherwise, I would
suffer him to rest quietly, that he may be prepared for the business of
the following day.”

“I shall obey your directions, sir; my necessary attendance will give
me a pretence not to leave him, and thus I shall hear all that passes
between him and all that visit him.”

“You will oblige me highly,” said Sir Philip, “and I shall go to rest
with confidence in your care.”

The surgeon returned to the sick man’s chamber, Sir Philip and the
Barons to the company below: they supped in the great hall, with all
the gentlemen that were present at the combat. Sir Philip and his Edmund
retired to their repose, being heartily fatigued; and the company staid
to a late hour, commenting upon the action of the day, praising the
courage and generosity of the noble knight, and wishing a good event to
his undertaking.

Most of Lord Lovel’s friends went away as soon as they saw him safely
lodged, being ashamed of him, and of their appearance in his behalf;
and the few that stayed were induced by their desire of a further
information of the base action he had committed, and to justify their
own characters and conduct.

The next morning Sir Philip entered into consultation with the two
Barons, on the methods he should take to get Edmund received, and
acknowledged, as heir of the house of Lovel. They were all of opinion,
that the criminal should be kept in fear till he had settled his
worldly affairs, and they had resolved how to dispose of him. With this
determination they entered his room, and enquired of the surgeon how he
had passed the night. He shook his head, and said but little.

Lord Lovel desired that he might be removed to his own house. Lord
Graham said, he could not consent to that, as there was evident danger
in removing him; and appealed to the surgeon, who confirmed his opinion.
Lord Graham desired he would make himself easy, and that he should have
every kind of assistance there.

Sir Philip then proposed to send for the Lord Fitz-Owen, who would see
that all possible care was taken of his brother-in-law, and would assist
him in settling his affairs. Lord Lovel was against it; he was peevish
and uneasy, and desired to be left with only his own servants to attend
him. Sir Philip quitted the room with a significant look; and the two
Lords endeavoured to reconcile him to his situation. He interrupted
them. “It is easy for men in your situation to advise, but it is
difficult for one in mine to practise; wounded in body and mind, it
is natural that I should strive to avoid the extremes of shame and
punishment; I thank you for your kind offices, and beg I may be left
with my own servants.”

“With them, and the surgeon, you shall,” said Lord Graham; and they both
retired.

Sir Philip met them below. “My lords,” said he, “I am desirous that my
Lord Fitz-Owen should be sent for, and that he may hear his brother’s
confession; for I suspect that he may hereafter deny, what only the fear
of death has extorted from him; with your permission I am determined to
send messengers to-day.”

They both expressed approbation, and Lord Clifford proposed to write
to him, saying, a letter from an impartial person will have the more
weight; I will send one of my principal domestics with your own. This
measure being resolved upon, Lord Clifford retired to write, and Sir
Philip to prepare his servants for instant departure. Edmund desired
leave to write to father Oswald, and John Wyatt was ordered to be the
bearer of his letter. When the Lord Clifford had finished his letter, he
read it to Sir Philip and his chosen friends, as follows:--

“RIGHT HON. MY GOOD LORD,--I have taken upon me to acquaint your
Lordship, that there has been a solemn combat at arms between your
brother-in-law, the Lord Lovel, and Sir Philip Harclay, Knt. of
Yorkshire. It was fought in the jurisdiction of the Lord Graham, who,
with myself, was appointed judge of the field; it was fairly won, and
Sir Philip is the conqueror. After he had gained the victory he declared
at large the cause of the quarrel, and that he had revenged the death
of Arthur Lord Lovel his friend, whom the present Lord Lovel had
assassinated, that he might enjoy his title and estate. The wounded man
confessed the fact; and Sir Philip gave him his life, and only carried
off his sword as a trophy of his victory. Both the victor and the
vanquished were conveyed to Lord Graham’s castle, where the Lord Lovel
now lies in great danger. He is desirous to settle his worldly affairs,
and to make his peace with God and man. Sir Philip Harclay says there
is a male heir of the house of Lovel, for whom he claims the title and
estate; but he is very desirous that your Lordship should be present at
the disposal of your brother’s property that of right belongs to him,
of which your children are the undoubted heirs. He also wants to consult
you in many other points of honour and equity. Let me intreat you, on
the receipt of this letter, to set out immediately for Lord Graham’s
castle, where you will be received with the utmost respect and
hospitality. You will hear things that will surprise you as much as they
do me; you will judge of them with that justice and honour that speaks
your character; and you will unite with us in wondering at the ways of
Providence, and submitting to its decrees, in punishing the guilty, and
doing justice to the innocent and oppressed. My best wishes and prayers
attend you and your hopeful family. My lord, I remain your humble
servant,

“CLIFFORD.”


Every one present expressed the highest approbation of this letter.
Sir Philip gave orders to John Wyatt to be very circumspect in his
behaviour, to give Edmund’s letter privately to father Oswald, and to
make no mention of him, or his pretensions to Lovel Castle.

Lord Clifford gave his servant the requisite precautions. Lord Graham
added a note of invitation, and sent it by a servant of his own. As soon
as all things were ready, the messengers set out with all speed for the
Castle of Lovel.

They stayed no longer by the way than to take some refreshment, but rode
night and day till they arrived there.

Lord Fitz-Owen was in the parlour with his children; Father Oswald was
walking in the avenue before the house, when he saw three messengers
whose horses seemed jaded, and the riders fatigued, like men come a long
journey. He came up, just as the first had delivered his message to the
porter. John Wyatt knew him; he dismounted, and made signs that he had
something to say to him; he retired back a few steps, and John, with
great dexterity, slipped a letter into his hand. The father gave him his
blessing, and a welcome.

“Who do you come from?” said he aloud.

“From the Lords Graham and Clifford to the Lord Fitz-Owen; and we bring
letters of consequence to the Baron.”

Oswald followed the messengers into the hall; a servant announced their
arrival. Lord Fitz-Owen received them in the parlour; Lord Clifford’s
servant delivered his master’s letter, Lord Graham’s his, and they said
they would retire and wait his Lordship’s answer. The Baron ordered them
some refreshment. They retired, and he opened his letters. He read them
with great agitations, he struck his hand upon his heart, he exclaimed,
“My fears are all verified! the blow is struck, and it has fallen upon
the guilty!”

Oswald came in a minute after.

“You are come in good time,” said the Baron. “Read that letter, that my
children may know the contents.”

He read it, with faultering voice, and trembling limbs. They were all
in great surprise. William looked down, and kept a studied silence. Sir
Robert exclaimed--

“Is it possible? can my uncle be guilty of such an action?”

“You hear,” said the Baron, “he has confessed it!”

“But to whom?” said Sir Robert.

His father replied, “Lord Clifford’s honour is unquestionable, and I
cannot doubt what he affirms.”

Sir Robert leaned his head upon his hand, as one lost in thought; at
length he seemed to awake.

“My Lord, I have no doubt that Edmund is at the bottom of this business.
Do you not remember that Sir Philip Harclay long ago promised him his
friendship? Edmund disappears; and, soon after, this man challenges my
Uncle. You know what passed here before his departure; He has suggested
this affair to Sir Philip, and instigated him to this action. This is
the return he has made for the favours he has received from our family,
to which he owes every thing!”

“Softly, my son!” said the Baron; “let us be cautious of reflecting upon
Edmund; there is a greater hand in this business. My conjecture was too
true; It was in that fatal apartment that he was made acquainted with
the circumstances of Lord Lovel’s death; he was, perhaps, enjoined to
reveal them to Sir Philip Harclay, the bosom friend of the deceased.
The mystery of that apartment is disclosed, the woe to the guilty is
accomplished! There is no reflection upon any one; Heaven effects its
purposes in its own time and manner. I and mine are innocent; let us
worship, and be silent!”

“But what do you propose to do?” said Sir Robert.

“To return with the messengers,” answered the Baron. “I think it highly
proper that I should see your Uncle, and hear what he has to say; my
children are his heirs; in justice to them, I ought to be acquainted
with every thing that concerns the disposal of his fortune.”

“Your Lordship is in the right,” answered Sir Robert, “it concerns us
all. I have only to ask your permission to bear you company.”

“With all my heart,” said the Baron; “I have only to ask of you in
return, that you will command yourself, and not speak your mind hastily;
wait for the proofs before you give judgment, and take advice of your
reason before you decide upon any thing; if you reflect upon the past,
you will find reason to distrust yourself. Leave all to me, and be
assured I will protect your honour and my own.”

“I will obey you in all things, my lord; and will make immediate
preparation for our departure.” So saying, he left the room.

As soon as he was gone, Mr. William broke silence.

“My Lord,” said he, “if you have no great objection, I beg leave also to
accompany you both.”

“You shall, my son, if you desire it; I think I can see your motives,
and your brother’s also; your coolness will be a good balance to his
warmth; you shall go with us. My son Walter shall be his sister’s
protector in our absence, and he shall be master here till we return.”

“I hope, my dear father, that will not be long; I shall not be happy
till you come home,” said the fair Emma.

“It shall be no longer, my dearest, than till this untoward affair is
settled.”

The Baron desired to know when the messengers were expected to return.
Oswald took this opportunity to retire; he went to his own apartment,
and read the letter, as follows:--

“The Heir of Lovel, to his dear and reverend friend, father Oswald.

“Let my friends at the Castle of Lovel know that I live in hopes one day
to see them there. If you could by any means return with the messengers,
your testimony would add weight to mine; perhaps you might obtain
permission to attend the Baron; I leave it to you to manage this. John
Wyatt will inform you of all that has passed here, and that hitherto my
success has outrun my expectation, and, almost, my wishes. I am in the
high road to my inheritance; and trust that the Power who hath conducted
me thus far, will not leave his work unfinished. Tell my beloved
William, that I live, and hope to embrace him before long. I recommend
myself to your holy prayers and blessing, and remain your son and
servant, Edmund.”

Oswald then went to the messengers; he drew John Wyatt to a distance
from the rest, and got the information he wanted. He stayed with
him till he was sent for by the Baron, to whom he went directly, and
prevented his questions, by saying, “I have been talking with the
messengers; I find they have travelled night and day to bring the
letters with all speed; they only require one night’s rest, and will be
ready to set out with you to-morrow.”

“‘Tis well,” said the Baron; “we will set out as soon as they are
ready.”

“My Lord,” said Oswald, “I have a favour to beg of you; it is, that I
may attend you; I have seen the progress of this wonderful discovery,
and I have a great desire to see the conclusion of it; perhaps my
presence may be of service in the course of your business.”

“Perhaps it may,” said the Baron; “I have no objection, if you desire to
go.”

They then separated, and went to prepare for their journey.

Oswald had a private interview with Joseph, whom he informed of all that
he knew, and his resolution to attend the Baron in his journey to the
north.

“I go,” said he, “to bear witness in behalf of injured innocence. If it
be needful, I shall call upon you; therefore hold yourself in readiness
in case you should be sent for.”

“That I will,” said Joseph, “and spend my last remains of life and
strength, to help my young lord to his right and title. But do they not
begin to suspect who is the heir of Lovel?”

“Not in the least,” said Oswald; “they think him concerned in the
discovery, but have no idea of his being interested in the event.”

“Oh, father!” said Joseph, “I shall think every day a week till your
return; but I will no longer keep you from your repose.”

“Good night,” said Oswald; “but I have another visit to pay before I go
to rest.”

He left Joseph, and went on tip-toe to Mr. William’s room, and tapped at
his door. He came and opened it. “What news, father?”

“Not much; I have only orders to tell you that Edmund is well, and as
much your friend as ever.”

“I guessed,” said William, “that we should hear something of him. I have
still another guess.”

“What is that, my child?”

“That we shall see or hear of him where we are going.”

“It is very likely,” said Oswald; “and I would have you be prepared for
it;--I am confident we shall hear nothing to his discredit.”

“I am certain of that,” said William, “and I shall rejoice to see him; I
conclude that he is under the protection of Sir Philip Harclay.”

“He is so,” said Oswald; “I had my information from Sir Philip’s
servant, who is one of the messengers, and was guide to the others in
their way hither.”

After some farther conversation they separated, and each went to his
repose.

The next morning the whole party set out on their journey; they
travelled by easy stages on account of the Baron’s health, which began
to be impaired, and arrived in health and spirits at the castle of Lord
Graham, where they were received with the utmost respect and kindness by
the noble master.

The Lord Lovel had recovered his health and strength as much as possible
in the time, and was impatient to be gone from thence to his own house.
He was surprised to hear of the arrival of his brother and nephews, and
expressed no pleasure at the thoughts of seeing them. When Sir Philip
Harclay came to pay his respects to Baron Fitz-Owen, the latter received
him with civility, but with a coldness that was apparent. Sir Robert
left the room, doubting his resolution. Sir Philip advanced, and took
the Baron by the hand.

“My Lord,” said he, “I rejoice to see you here. I cannot be satisfied
with the bare civilities of such a man as you. I aspire to your esteem,
to your friendship, and I shall not be happy till I obtain them. I will
make you the judge of every part of my conduct, and where you shall
condemn me, I will condemn myself.”

The Baron was softened, his noble heart felt its alliance with its
counterpart, but he thought the situation of his brother demanded some
reserve towards the man who sought his life; but, in spite of himself,
it wore off every moment. Lord Clifford related all that had passed,
with the due regard to Sir Philip’s honour; he remarked how nobly he
concealed the cause of his resentment against the Lord Lovel till the
day of combat, that he might not prepossess the judges against him. He
enlarged on his humanity to the vanquished, on the desire he expressed
to have justice done to his heirs; finally, he mentioned his great
respect for the Lord Fitz-Owen, and the solicitude he shewed to have
him come to settle the estate of the sick man in favour of his children.
Lord Clifford also employed his son to soften Sir Robert, and to explain
to him every doubtful part of Sir Philip’s behaviour.

After the travellers had taken some rest, the Lord Graham proposed that
they should make a visit to the sick man’s chamber. The lords sent
to acquaint him they were coming to visit him, and they followed the
messenger. The Lord Fitz-Owen went up to the bedside; he embraced his
brother with strong emotions of concern. Sir Robert followed him; then
Mr. William.

Lord Lovel embraced them, but said nothing; his countenance shewed his
inward agitations. “Lord Fitz-Owen first broke silence.

“I hope,” said he, “I see my brother better than I expected?”

Lord Lovel bit his fingers, he pulled the bed-clothes, he seemed almost
distracted; at length he broke out--

“I owe no thanks to those who sent for my relations! Sir Philip Harclay,
you have used ungenerously the advantage you have gained ov