e to ask Mr. William to ride out
with him, which finished the conference.

The fair Emma from this time assumed an air of satisfaction; and William
frequently stole away from his companions to talk with his sister upon
their favourite subject.

While these things passed at the castle of Lovel, Edmund and his
companion John Wyatt proceeded on their journey to Sir Philip Harclay’s
seat; they conversed together on the way, and Edmund found him a man of
understanding, though not improved by education; he also discovered that
John loved his master, and respected him even to veneration; from him he
learned many particulars concerning that worthy knight. Wyatt told him,
“That Sir Philip maintained twelve old soldiers who had been maimed and
disabled in the wars, and had no provision made for them; also six
old officers, who had been unfortunate, and were grown grey without
preferment; he likewise mentioned the Greek gentleman, his master’s
captive and friend, as a man eminent for valour and piety; but, beside
these,” said Wyatt, “there are many others who eat of my master’s bread
and drink of his cup, and who join in blessings and prayers to Heaven
for their noble benefactor; his ears are ever open to distress, his hand
to relieve it, and he shares in every good man’s joys and blessings.”

“Oh, what a glorious character!” said Edmund; “how my heart throbs with
wishes to imitate such a man! Oh, that I might resemble him, though at
ever so great a distance!”

Edmund was never weary of hearing the actions of this truly great man,
nor Wyatt with relating them; and, during three days journey, there were
but few pauses in their conversation.

The fourth day, when they came within view of the house, Edmund’s heart
began to raise doubts of his reception. “If,” said he, “Sir Philip
should not receive me kindly, if he should resent my long neglect, and
disown my acquaintance, it would be no more than justice.”

He sent Wyatt before, to notify his arrival to Sir Philip, while
he waited at the gate, full of doubts and anxieties concerning his
reception. Wyatt was met and congratulated on his return by most of his
fellow-servants. He asked--

“Where is my master?”

“In the parlour.”

“Are any strangers with him?”

“No, only his own family.”

“Then I will shew myself to him.”

He presented himself before Sir Philip.

“So, John,” said he, “you are welcome home! I hope you left your parents
and relations well?”

“All well, thank God! and send their humble duty to your honour, and
they pray for you every day of their lives. I hope your honour is in
good health.”

“Very well.”

“Thank God for that! but, sir, I have something further to tell you;
I have had a companion all the way home, a person who comes to wait on
your honour, on business of great consequence, as he says.”

“Who is that, John?”

“It is Master Edmund Twyford, from the castle of Lovel.”

“Young Edmund!” says Sir Philip, surprised; “where is he?”

“At the gate, sir.”

“Why did you leave him there?”

“Because he bade me come before, and acquaint your honour, that he waits
your pleasure.”

“Bring him hither,” said Sir Philip; “tell him I shall be glad to see
him.”

John made haste to deliver his message, and Edmund followed him in
silence into Sir Philip’s presence.

He bowed low, and kept at a distance. Sir Philip held out his hand,
and bad him approach. As he drew near, he was seized with an universal
trembling; he kneeled down, took his hand, kissed it, and pressed it to
his heart in silence.

“You are welcome, young man!” said Sir Philip; “take courage, and speak
for yourself.”

Edmund sighed deeply; he at length broke silence with difficulty. “I am
come thus far, noble sir, to throw myself at your feet, and implore your
protection. You are, under God, my only reliance.”

“I receive you,” said Sir Philip, “with all my heart! Your person is
greatly improved since I saw you last, and I hope your mind is equally
so; I have heard a great character of you from some that knew you in
France. I remember the promise I made you long ago, and am ready now
to fulfil it, upon condition that you have done nothing to disgrace the
good opinion I formerly entertained of you; and am ready to serve you in
any thing consistent with my own honour.”

Edmund kissed the hand that was extended to raise him. “I accept your
favour, sir, upon this condition only; and if ever you find me to impose
upon your credulity, or incroach on your goodness, may you renounce me
from that moment!”

“Enough,” said Sir Philip; “rise, then, and let me embrace you; You are
truly welcome!”

“Oh, noble sir!” said Edmund, “I have a strange story to tell you; but
it must be by ourselves, with only heaven to bear witness to what passes
between us.”

“Very well,” said Sir Philip; “I am ready to hear you; but first, go and
get some refreshment after your journey, and then come to me again. John
Wyatt will attend you.”

“I want no refreshment,” said Edmund; “and I cannot eat or drink till I
have told my business to your honour.”

“Well then,” said Sir Philip, “come along with me.” He took the youth by
the hand, and led him into another parlour, leaving his friends in great
surprise, what this young man’s errand could be; John Wyatt told them
all that he knew relating to Edmund’s birth, character, and situation.

When Sir Philip had seated his young friend, he listened in silence to
the surprising tale he had to tell him. Edmund told him briefly the most
remarkable circumstances of his life, from the time when he first
saw and liked him, till his return from France; but from that era,
he related at large every thing that had happened, recounting every
interesting particular, which was imprinted on his memory in strong and
lasting characters. Sir Philip grew every moment more affected by the
recital; sometimes he clasped his hands together, he lifted them up to
heaven, he smote his breast, he sighed, he exclaimed aloud; when Edmund
related his dream, he breathed short, and seemed to devour him with
attention; when he described the fatal closet, he trembled, sighed,
sobbed, and was almost suffocated with his agitation. But when he
related all that passed between his supposed mother and himself, and
finally produced the jewels, the proofs of his birth, and the death of
his unfortunate mother, he flew to him, he pressed him to his bosom, he
strove to speak, but speech was for some minutes denied. He wept aloud;
and, at length, his words found their way in broken exclamations.

“Son of my dearest friend! Dear and precious relic of a noble house!
child of Providence! the beloved of heaven! welcome! thrice welcome to
my arms! to my heart! I will be thy parent from henceforward, and thou
shalt be indeed my child, my heir! My mind told me from the first moment
I beheld thee, that thou wert the image of my friend! my heart then
opened itself to receive thee, as his offspring. I had a strange
foreboding that I was to be thy protector. I would then have made
thee my own; but heaven orders things for the best; it made thee the
instrument of this discovery, and in its own time and manner conducted
thee to my arms. Praise be to God for his wonderful doings towards the
children of men! every thing that has befallen thee is by his direction,
and he will not leave his work unfinished; I trust that I shall be his
instrument to do justice on the guilty, and to restore the orphan of
my friend to his rights and title. I devote myself to this service, and
will make it the business of my life to effect it.”

Edmund gave vent to his emotions, in raptures of joy and gratitude.
They spent several hours in this way, without thinking of the time that
passed; the one enquiring, the other explaining, and repeating, every
particular of the interesting story.

At length they were interrupted by the careful John Wyatt, who was
anxious to know if any thing was likely to give trouble to his master.

“Sir,” said John, “it grows dark--do you want a light?”

“We want no light but what heaven gives us,” said Sir Philip; “I knew
not whether it was dark or light.”

“I hope,” said John, “nothing has happened, I hope your honour has heard
no bad tidings; I--I--I hope no offence.”

“None at all,” said the good knight; “I am obliged to your solicitude
for me; I have heard some things that grieve me, and others that give me
great pleasure; but the sorrows are past, and the joys remain.”

“Thank God!” said John; “I was afraid something was the matter to give
your honour trouble.”

“I thank you, my good servant! You see this young gentleman; I would
have you, John, devote yourself to his service; I give you to him for an
attendant on his person, and would have you show your affection to me by
your attachment to him.”

“Oh, Sir!” said John in a melancholy voice, “what have I done to be
turned out of your service?”

“No such matter, John,” said Sir Philip; “you will not leave my
service.”

“Sir,” said John, “I would rather die than leave you.”

“And, my lad, I like you too well to part with you; but in serving my
friend you will serve me. Know, that this young man is my son.”

“Your son, sir!” said John.

“Not my natural son, but my relation; my son by adoption, my heir!”

“And will he live with you, sir?”

“Yes, John; and I hope to die with him.”

“Oh, then, I will serve him with all my heart and soul; and I will do my
best to please you both.”

“I thank you, John, and I will not forget your honest love and duty.
I have so good an opinion of you, that I will tell you of some things
concerning this gentleman that will entitle him to your respect.”

“‘Tis enough for me,” said John, “to know that your honour respects him,
to make me pay him as much duty as yourself.”

“But, John, when you know him better, you will respect him still more;
at present, I shall only tell you what he is not; for you think him only
the son of Andrew Twyford.”

“And is he not?” said John.

“No, but his wife nursed him, and he passed for her son.”

“And does old Twyford know it, sir?”

“He does, and will bear witness to it; but he is the son of a near
friend of mine, of quality superior to my own, and as such you must
serve and respect him.”

“I shall, to be sure, sir; but what name shall I call him?”

“You shall know that hereafter; in the mean time bring a light, and wait
on us to the other parlour.”

When John was withdrawn, Sir Philip said, “That is a point to be
considered and determined immediately; It is proper that you should
assume a name till you can take that of your father; for I choose you
should drop that of your foster-father; and I would have you be called
by one that is respectable.”

“In that, and every other point, I will be wholly governed by you, sir,”
 said Edmund.

“Well then, I will give you the name of Seagrave; I shall say that you
are a relation of my own; and my mother was really of that family.”

John soon returned, and attended them into the other parlour; Sir Philip
entered, with Edmund in his hand.


“My friends,” said he, “this gentleman is Mr. Edward Seagrave, the
son of a dear friend and relation of mine. He was lost in his infancy,
brought up by a good woman out of pure humanity, and is but lately
restored to his own family. The circumstances shall be made known
hereafter; In the meantime, I have taken him under my care and
protection, and will use all my power and interest to see him restored
to his fortune, which is enjoyed by the usurper who was the cause of his
expulsion, and the death of his parents. Receive him as my relation,
and friend; Zadisky, do you embrace him first. Edmund, you and this
gentleman must love each other for my sake; hereafter you will do it for
your own.[”] They all rose; each embraced and congratulated the young
man.

Zadisky said, “Sir, whatever griefs and misfortunes you may have
endured, you may reckon them at an end, from the hour you are beloved
and protected by Sir Philip Harclay.”

“I firmly believe it, sir,” replied Edmund; “and my heart enjoys,
already, more happiness than I ever yet felt, and promises me all that I
can wish in future; his friendship is the earnest Heaven gives me of its
blessings hereafter.”

They sat down to supper with mutual cheerfulness; and Edmund enjoyed the
repast with more satisfaction than he had felt a long time. Sir Philip
saw his countenance brighten up, and looked on him with heart-felt
pleasure.

“Every time I look on you,” said he, “reminds me of your father; you
are the same person I loved twenty-three years ago--I rejoice to see you
under my roof. Go to your repose early, and to-morrow we will consult
farther.”

Edmund withdrew, and enjoyed a night of sweet undisturbed repose.

The next morning Edmund arose in perfect health and spirits: he waited
on his benefactor. They were soon after joined by Zadisky, who shewed
great attention and respect to the youth, and offered him his best
services without reserve. Edmund accepted them with equal respect and
modesty; and finding himself at ease, began to display his amiable
qualities. They breakfasted together; afterwards, Sir Philip desired
Edmund to walk out with him.

As soon as they were out of hearing, Sir Philip said, “I could not sleep
last night for thinking of your affairs; I laid schemes for you, and
rejected them again. We must lay our plan before we begin to act. What
shall be done with this treacherous kinsman! this inhuman monster! this
assassin of his nearest relation? I will risk my life and fortune to
bring him to justice. Shall I go to court, and demand justice of the
king? or shall I accuse him of the murder, and make him stand a public
trial? If I treat him as a baron of the realm, he must be tried by his
peers; if as a commoner, he must be tried at the county assize; but we
must shew reason why he should be degraded from his title. Have you any
thing to propose?”

“Nothing, sir; I have only to wish that it might be as private as
possible, for the sake of my noble benefactor, the Lord Fitz-Owen, upon
whom some part of the family disgrace would naturally fall; and that
would be an ill return for all his kindness and generosity to me.”

“That is a generous and grateful consideration on your part; but you owe
still more to the memory of your injured parents. However, there is
yet another way that suits me better than any hitherto proposed; I will
challenge the traitor to meet me in the field; and, if he has spirit
enough to answer my call, I will there bring him to justice; if not, I
will bring him to a public trial.”

“No, sir,” said Edmund, “that is my province. Should I stand by and see
my noble, gallant friend expose his life for me, I should be unworthy to
bear the name of that friend whom you so much lament. It will become
his son to vindicate his name, and revenge his death. I will be the
challenger, and no other.”

“And do you think he will answer the challenge of an unknown youth, with
nothing but his pretensions to his name and title? Certainly not. Leave
this matter to me; I will think of a way that will oblige him to meet me at
the house of a third person who is known to all the parties concerned,
and where we will have authentic witnesses of all that passes between
him and me. I will devise the time, place, and manner, and satisfy all
your scruples.”

Edmund offered to reply; but Sir Philip bad him be silent, and let him
proceed in his own way.

He then led him over his estate, and shewed him every thing deserving
his notice; he told him all the particulars of his domestic economy, and
they returned home in time to meet their friends at dinner.

They spent several days in consulting how to bring Sir Walter to
account, and in improving their friendship and confidence in each
other. Edmund endeared himself so much to his friend and patron, that
he declared him his adopted son and heir before all his friends and
servants, and ordered them to respect him as such. He every day improved
their love and regard for him, and became the darling of the whole
family.

After much consideration, Sir Philip fixed his resolutions, and began
to execute his purposes. He set out for the seat of the Lord Clifford,
attended by Edmund, M. Zadisky, and two servants. Lord Clifford received
them with kindness and hospitality.

Sir Philip presented Edmund to Lord Clifford and his family, as his near
relation and presumptive heir; They spent the evening in the pleasures
of convivial mirth and hospitable entertainment. The next day Sir Philip
began to open his mind to Lord Clifford, informing him that both his
young friend and himself had received great injuries from the present
Lord Lovel, for which they were resolved to call him to account; but
that, for many reasons, they were desirous to have proper witnesses
of all that should pass between them, and begging the favour of his
Lordship to be the principal one. Lord Clifford acknowledged the
confidence placed in him; and besought Sir Philip to let him be the
arbitrator between them. Sir Philip assured him, that their wrongs would
not admit of arbitration, as he should hereafter judge; but that he was
unwilling to explain them further till he knew certainly whether or not
the Lord Lovel would meet him; for, if he refused, he must take another
method with him.

Lord Clifford was desirous to know the grounds of the quarrel; but Sir
Philip declined entering into particulars at present, assuring him of
a full information hereafter. He then sent M. Zadisky, attended by John
Wyatt, and a servant of Lord Clifford, with a letter to Lord Lovel; the
contents were as follow:--

“My Lord Lovel,--Sir Philip Harclay earnestly desires to see you at the
house of Lord Clifford, where he waits to call you to account for the
injuries done by you to the late Arthur Lord Lovel, your kinsman; If you
accept his demand, he will make the Lord Clifford a witness and a judge
of the cause; if not, he will expose you publicly as a traitor and a
coward. Please to answer this letter, and he will acquaint you with the
time, place, and manner of the meeting.

“PHILIP HARCLAY.”


Zadisky presented the letter to Lord Lovel, informing him that he was
the friend of Sir Philip Harclay. He seemed surprised and confounded at
the contents; but, putting on an haughty air, “I know nothing,” said
he, “of the business this letter hints at; but wait a few hours, and I
will give you an answer.” He gave orders to treat Zadisky as a gentleman
in every respect, except in avoiding his company; for the Greek had
a shrewd and penetrating aspect, and he observed every turn of his
countenance. The next day he came and apologized for his absence, and
gave him the answer; sending his respects to the Lord Clifford. The
messengers returned with all speed, and Sir Philip read the answer
before all present.


“Lord Lovel knows not of any injuries done by him to the late Arthur
Lord Lovel, whom he succeeded by just right of inheritance; nor of any
right Sir Philip Harclay has, to call to account a man to whom he is
barely known, having seen him only once, many years ago, at the house of
his uncle, the old Lord Lovel: Nevertheless, Lord Lovel will not suffer
any man to call his name and honour into question with impunity; for
which reason he will meet Sir Philip Harclay at any time, place, and in
what manner he shall appoint, bringing the same number of friends and
dependents, that justice may be done to all parties.

“LOVEL.”


“‘Tis well,” said Sir Philip; “I am glad to find he has the spirit to
meet me; he is an enemy worthy of my sword.”

Lord Clifford then proposed that both parties should pass the borders,
and obtain leave of the warden of the Scottish marches to decide the
quarrel in his jurisdiction, with a select number of friends on both
sides. Sir Philip agreed to the proposal; and Lord Clifford wrote in his
own name to ask permission of the Lord Graham, that his friends might
come there; and obtained it, on condition that neither party should
exceed a limited number of friends and followers.

Lord Clifford sent chosen messengers to Lord Lovel, acquainting him
with the conditions, and appointing the time, place, and manner of their
meeting, and that he had been desired to accept the office of judge of
the field. Lord Lovel accepted the conditions, and promised to be there
without fail. Lord Clifford notified the same to Lord Graham, warden of
the marches, who caused a piece of ground to be inclosed for the lists,
and made preparations against the day appointed.

In the interim, Sir Philip Harclay thought proper to settle his worldly
affairs. He made Zadisky acquainted with every circumstance of Edmund’s
history, and the obligation that lay upon him to revenge the death of
his friend, and see justice done to his heir. Zadisky entered into the
cause with an ardour that spoke the affection he bore to his friend.

“Why,” said he, “would you not suffer me to engage this traitor? Your
life is of too much consequence to be staked against his; but though
I trust that the justice of your cause must succeed, yet, if it should
happen otherwise, I vow to revenge you; he shall never go back from us
both. However, my hope and trust is, to see your arm the minister of
justice.”

 Sir Philip then sent for a lawyer and made his will, by which he
appointed Edmund his chief heir, by the name of Lovel, alias Seagrave,
alias Twyford; he ordered that all his old friends, soldiers, and
servants, should be maintained in the same manner during their lives;
he left to Zadisky an annuity of an hundred a year, and a legacy of two
hundred pounds; one hundred pounds to a certain monastery; the same sum
to be distributed among disbanded soldiers, and the same to the poor and
needy in his neighbourhood.

He appointed Lord Clifford joint executor with Edmund, and gave his
will into that nobleman’s care, recommending Edmund to his favour and
protection.

“If I live,” said he, “I will make him appear to be worthy of it; if I
die, he will want a friend. I am desirous your lordship, as a judge of
the field, should be unprejudiced on either side, that you may judge
impartially. If I die, Edmund’s pretensions die with me; but my friend
Zadisky will acquaint you with the foundation of them. I take these
precautions, because I ought to be prepared for every thing; but my
heart is warm with better hopes, and I trust I shall live to justify
my own cause, as well as that of my friend, who is a person of more
consequence than he appears to be.”

Lord Clifford accepted the trust, and expressed the greatest reliance
upon Sir Philip’s honour and veracity.

While these preparations were making for the great event that was to
decide the pretensions of Edmund, his enemies at the Castle of Lovel
were brought to shame for their behaviour to him.

The disagreement between Wenlock and Markham had by degrees brought on
an explanation of some parts of their conduct. Father Oswald had often
hinted to the Baron, Wenlock’s envy of Edmund’s superior qualities,
and the artifices by which he had obtained such an influence with Sir
Robert, as to make him take his part upon all occasions. Oswald now
took advantage of the breach between these two incendiaries, to persuade
Markham to justify himself at Wenlock’s expence, and to tell all he
knew of his wickedness; at length, he promised to declare all he knew
of Wenlock’s conduct, as well in France as since their return, when he
should be called upon; and, by him, Oswald was enabled to unravel the
whole of his contrivances, against the honour, interest, and even life
of Edmund.

He prevailed on Hewson, and Kemp, his associate, to add their testimony
to the others. Hewson confessed that he was touched in his conscience,
when he reflected on the cruelty and injustice of his behaviour to
Edmund, whose behaviour towards him, after he had laid a snare for his
life, was so noble and generous, that he was cut to the heart by it,
and had suffered so much pain and remorse, that he longed for nothing
so much as an opportunity to unburden his mind; but the dread of Mr.
Wenlock’s anger, and the effects of his resentment, had hitherto kept
him silent, always hoping there would come a time, when he might have
leave to declare the whole truth.

Oswald conveyed this information to the Baron’s ear, who waited for
an opportunity to make the proper use of it. Not long after, the two
principal incendiaries came to an open rupture, and Markham threatened
Wenlock that he would shew his uncle what a serpent he had harboured in
his bosom. The Baron arrested his words, and insisted upon his telling
all he knew; adding,--

“If you speak the truth, I will support you; but if you prove false, I
will punish you severely. As to Mr. Wenlock, he shall have a fair trial;
and, if all the accusations I have heard are made good, it is high time
that I should put him out of my family.”

The Baron, with a stern aspect, bade them follow him into the great
hall; and sent for all the rest of the family together.

He then, with great solemnity, told them he was ready to hear all sides
of the question. He declared the whole substance of his informations,
and called upon the accusers to support the charge. Hewson and Kemp gave
the same account they had done to Oswald, offering to swear to the
truth of their testimony; several of the other servants related such
circumstances as had come to their knowledge. Markham then spoke of
every thing, and gave a particular account of all that had passed on
the night they spent in the east apartment; he accused himself of being
privy to Wenlock’s villany, called himself fool and blockhead for being
the instrument of his malignant disposition, and asked pardon of his
uncle for concealing it so long.

The Baron called upon Wenlock to reply to the charge; who, instead of
answering, flew into a passion, raged, swore, threatened, and finally
denied every thing. The witnesses persisted in their assertions. Markham
desired leave to make known the reason why they were all afraid of him.

“He gives it out,” said he, “that he is to be my lord’s son-in-law;
and they, supposing him to stand first in his favour, are afraid of his
displeasure.”

“I hope,” said the Baron, “I shall not be at such a loss for a
son-in-law, as to make choice of such a one as him; he never but once
hinted at such a thing, and then I gave him no encouragement. I have
long seen there was something very wrong in him; but I did not believe
he was of so wicked a disposition; It is no wonder that princes should
be so frequently deceived, when I, a private man, could be so much
imposed upon within the circle of my own family. What think you, son
Robert?”

“I, sir, have been much more imposed on; and I take shame to myself on
the occasion.”

“Enough, my son,” said the Baron; “a generous confession is only a proof
of growing wisdom. You are now sensible, that the best of us are liable
to imposition. The artifices of this unworthy kinsman have set us at
variance with each other, and driven away an excellent youth from this
house, to go I know not whither; but he shall no longer triumph in his
wickedness; he shall feel what it is to be banished from the house of
his protector. He shall set out for his mother’s this very day; I will
write to her in such a manner as shall inform her that he has offended
me, without particularising the nature of his faults; I will give him an
opportunity of recovering his credit with his own family, and this shall
be my security against his doing further mischief. May he repent, and be
forgiven.

“Markham deserves punishment, but not in the same degree.”

“I confess it,” said he, “and will submit to whatever your lordship
shall enjoin.”

“You shall only be banished for a time, but he for ever. I will send
you abroad on a business that shall put you in a way to do credit to
yourself, and service to me. Son Robert, have you any objection to my
sentence?”

“My Lord,” said he, “I have great reason to distrust myself; I am
sensible of my own weakness, and your superior wisdom, as well as
goodness; and I will henceforward submit to you in all things.”

The Baron ordered two of his servants to pack up Wenlock’s clothes and
necessaries, and to set out with him that very day; he bade some others
keep an eye upon him lest he should escape; As soon as they were ready,
my Lord wished him a good journey, and gave him a letter for his mother.
He departed without saying a word, in a sullen kind of resentment, but
his countenance shewed the inward agitations of his mind.

As soon as he was gone, every mouth was opened against him; a thousand
stories came out that they never heard before; The Baron and his sons
were astonished that he should go on so long without detection. My lord
sighed deeply at the thoughts of Edmund’s expulsion, and ardently wished
to know what was become of him.


Sir Robert took the opportunity of coming to an explanation with his
brother William; he took shame to himself for some part of his past
behaviour. Mr. William owned his affection to Edmund, and justified it
by his merit and attachment to him, which were such that he was
certain no time or distance could alter them. He accepted his brother’s
acknowledgement, as a full amends for all that had passed, and begged
that henceforward an entire love and confidence might ever subsist
between them. These new regulations restored peace, confidence, and
harmony, in the Castle of Lovel.

At length, the day arrived for the combatants to meet. The Lord Graham,
with twelve followers gentlemen, and twelve servants, was ready at the
dawn of day to receive them.

The first that entered the field, was Sir Philip Harclay, knight, armed
completely, excepting his head-piece; Hugh Rugby, his esquire, bearing
his lance; John Barnard, his page, carrying his helmet and spurs; and
two servants in his proper livery. The next came Edmund, the heir of
Lovel, followed by his servant John Wyatt; Zadisky, followed by his
servant.


At a short distance came the Lord Clifford, as judge of the field, with
his esquire, two pages, and two livery-servants; followed by his eldest
son, his nephew, and a gentleman his friend, each attended by one
servant; He also brought a surgeon of note to take care of the wounded.


The Lord Graham saluted them; and, by his order, they took their places
without the lists, and the trumpet sounded for the challenger. It was
answered by the defendant, who soon after appeared, attended by three
gentlemen his friends, with each one servant, beside his own proper
attendants.

A place was erected for the Lord Clifford, as judge of the field;
he desired Lord Graham would share the office, who accepted it, on
condition that the combatants should make no objection, and they agreed
to it with the greatest courtesy and respect. They consulted together on
many points of honour and ceremony between the two combatants.

They appointed a marshal of the field, and other inferior officers,
usually employed on these occasions. The Lord Graham sent the marshal
for the challenger, desiring him to declare the cause of his quarrel
before his enemy. Sir Philip Harclay then advanced, and thus spoke:

“I, Philip Harclay, knight, challenge Walter, commonly called Lord
Lovel, as a base, treacherous, and bloody man, who, by his wicked arts
and devices, did kill, or cause to be killed, his kinsman, Arthur Lord
Lovel, my dear and noble friend. I am called upon, in an extraordinary
manner, to revenge his death; and I will prove the truth of what I have
affirmed at the peril of my life.”

Lord Graham then bade the defendant answer to the charge. Lord Lovel
stood forth before his followers, and thus replied:

“I, Walter, Baron of Lovel, do deny the charge against me, and affirm
it to be a base, false, and malicious accusation of this Sir Philip
Harclay, which I believe to be invented by himself, or else framed by
some enemy, and told to him for wicked ends; but, be that as it may, I
will maintain my own honour, and prove him to be a false traitor, at the
hazard of my own life, and to the punishment of his presumption.”

Then said the Lord Graham, “will not this quarrel admit of arbitration?”

“No,” replied Sir Philip; “when I have justified this charge, I have
more to bring against him. I trust in God and the justice of my cause,
and defy that traitor to the death!”

Lord Clifford then spoke a few words to Lord Graham, who immediately
called to the marsh