er me! you
spared my life, only to take away my reputation. You have exposed me to
strangers, and, what is worse, to my dearest friends; when I lay in
a state of danger, you obliged me to say any thing, and now you take
advantage of it, to ruin me in my friends’ affection. But, if I recover,
you may repent it!”

Sir Philip then came forward.

“My Lords, I shall take no notice of what this unhappy man has just now
said; I shall appeal to you, as to the honourable witnesses of all that
has passed; you see it was no more than necessary. I appeal to you for
the motives of my treatment of him, before, at, and after our meeting.
I did not take his life, as I might have done; I wished him to repent of
his sins, and to make restitution of what he unjustly possesses. I was
called out to do an act of justice; I had taken the heir of Lovel under
my protection, my chief view was to see justice done to him;--what
regarded this man was but a secondary motive. This was my end, and I
will never, never lose sight of it.”

Lord Lovel seemed almost choaked with passion, to see every one giving
some mark of approbation and respect to Sir Philip. He called out--

“I demand to know who is this pretended heir, whom he brings out to
claim my title and fortune?”

“My noble auditors,” said Sir Philip, “I shall appeal to your
judgment, in regard to the proofs of my ward’s birth and family; every
circumstance shall be laid before you, and you shall decide upon them.

“Here is a young man, supposed the son of a peasant, who, by a train
of circumstances that could not have happened by human contrivance,
discovers not only who were his real parents, but that they came to
untimely deaths. He even discovers the different places where their
bones are buried, both out of consecrated ground, and appeals to their
ashes for the truth of his pretensions. He has also living proofs to
offer, that will convince the most incredulous. I have deferred entering
into particulars, till the arrival of Baron Fitz-Owen. I know his
noble heart and honourable character, from one that has long been an
eye-witness of his goodness; such is the opinion I have of his justice,
that I will accept him as one of the judges in his brother’s cause.
I and my ward will bring our proofs before him, and the company here
present; in the course of them, it will appear that he is the best
qualified of any to judge of them, because he can ascertain many of
the facts we shall have occasion to mention. I will rest our cause upon
their decision.”

Lord Graham applauded Sir Philip’s appeal, affirming his own
impartiality, and calling upon Lord Clifford and his son, and also his
own nephews who were present. Lord Clifford said--

“Sir Philip offers fairly, and like himself; there can be no place nor
persons more impartial than the present, and I presume the Lord Lovel
can have no objection.”

“No objection!” answered he; “what, to be tried like a criminal, to have
judges appointed over me, to decide upon my right to my own estate and
title? I will not submit to such a jurisdiction!”

“Then,” said Sir Philip, “you had rather be tried by the laws of the
land, and have them pronounce sentence upon you? Take your choice, sir;
if you refuse the one, you shall be certain of the other.”

Lord Clifford then said--“You will allow Lord Lovel to consider of
the proposal; he will consult his friends, and be determined by their
advice.”

Lord Fitz-Owen said--“I am very much surprised at what I have heard. I
should be glad to know all that Sir Philip Harclay has to say for his
ward, that I may judge what my brother has to hope or fear; I will then
give my best advice, or offer my mediation, as he may stand in need of
them.”

“You say well,” replied Lord Graham, “and pray let us come directly to
the point; Sir Philip, you will introduce your ward to this company, and
enter upon your proofs.”

Sir Philip bowed to the company; he went out and brought in Edmund,
encouraging him by the way; he presented him to Baron Fitz-Owen, who
looked very serious.

“Edmund Twyford,” said he, “are you the heir of the house of Lovel?”

“I am, my Lord,” said Edmund, bowing to the ground; “the proofs will
appear; but I am, at the same time, the most humble and grateful of all
your servants, and the servant of your virtues.”

Sir Robert rose up, and was going to leave the room.

“Son Robert, stay,” said the Baron; “if there is any fraud, you will be
pleased to detect it, and, if all that is affirmed be true, you will not
shut your eyes against the light; you are concerned in this business;
hear it in silence, and let reason be arbiter in your cause.”

He bowed to his father, bit his lip, and retired to the window. William
nodded to Edmund, and was silent. All the company had their eyes fixed
on the young man, who stood in the midst, casting down his eyes with
modest respect to the audience; while Sir Philip related all the
material circumstances of his life, the wonderful gradation by which
he came to the knowledge of his birth, the adventures of the haunted
apartment, the discovery of the fatal closet, and the presumptive proofs
that Lord Lovel was buried there. At this part of his narration, Lord
Fitz-Owen interrupted him.

“Where is this closet you talk of? for I and my sons went over the
apartment since Edmund’s departure, and found no such place as you
describe.”

“My Lord,” said Edmund, “I can account for it: the door is covered with
tapestry, the same as the room, and you might easily overlook it; but I
have a witness here,” said he, and putting his hand into his bosom,
he drew out the key. “If this is not the key of that closet, let me
be deemed an impostor, and all I say a falsehood; I will risk my
pretensions upon this proof.”

“And for what purpose did you take it away?” said the Baron.

“To prevent any person from going into it,” replied Edmund; “I have
vowed to keep it till I shall open that closet before witnesses
appointed for that purpose.”

“Proceed, sir,” said the Baron Fitz-Owen.

Sir Philip then related the conversation between Edmund and Margery
Twyford, his supposed mother.

Lord Fitz-Owen seemed in the utmost surprise. He exclaimed, “Can this be
true? strange discovery! unfortunate child!”


Edmund’s tears bore witness to his veracity. He was obliged to hide
his face, he lifted up his clasped hands to heaven, and was in great
emotions during all this part of the relation; while Lord Lovel groaned,
and seemed in great agitation.

Sir Philip then addressed himself to Lord Fitz-Owen.

“My Lord, there was another person present at the conversation between
Edmund and his foster-mother, who can witness to all that passed;
perhaps your lordship can tell who that was?”

“It was father Oswald,” replied the Baron; “I well remember that he went
with him at his request; let him be called in.”

He was sent for, and came immediately. The Baron desired him to relate
all that passed between Edmund and his mother.

Oswald then began--

“Since I am now properly called upon to testify what I know concerning
this young man, I will speak the truth, without fear or favour of any
one; and I will swear, by the rules of my holy order, to the truth of
what I shall relate.”

He then gave a particular account of all that passed on that occasion,
and mentioned the tokens found on both the infant and his mother.

“Where are these tokens to be seen?” said the Lord Clifford.

“I have them here, my lord,” said Edmund, “and I keep them as my
greatest treasures.”

He then produced them before all the company.

“There is no appearance of any fraud or collusion,” said Lord Graham;
“if any man thinks he sees any, let him speak.”

“Pray, my lord, suffer me to speak a word,” said Sir Robert. “Do you
remember that I hinted my suspicions concerning father Oswald, the night
our kinsmen lay in the east apartment?”

“I do,” said the Baron.

“Well, sir, it now appears that he did know more than he would tell us;
you find he is very deep in all Edmund’s secrets, and you may judge what
were his motives for undertaking this journey.”

“I observe what you say,” answered his father, “but let us hear all that
Oswald has to say; I will be as impartial as possible.”

“My lord,” returned Oswald, “I beg you also to recollect what I said, on
the night your son speaks of, concerning secrecy in certain matters.”

“I remember that also,” said the Baron; “but proceed.”

“My lord,” continued Oswald, “I knew more than I thought myself at
liberty to disclose at that time; but I will now tell you every thing.
I saw there was something more than common in the accidents that
befell this young man, and in his being called out to sleep in the east
apartment; I earnestly desired him to let me be with him on the second
night, to which he consented reluctantly; we heard a great noise in the
rooms underneath, we went down stairs together; I saw him open the fatal
closet, I heard groans that pierced me to the heart, I kneeled down and
prayed for the repose of the spirit departed; I found a seal, with the
arms of Lovel engraven upon it, which I gave to Edmund, and he now has
it in his possession. He enjoined me to keep secret what I had seen and
heard, till the time should come to declare it. I conceived that I
was called to be a witness of these things; besides, my curiosity was
excited to know the event; I, therefore, desired to be present at
the interview between him and his mother, which was affecting beyond
expression. I heard what I have now declared as nearly as my memory
permits me. I hope no impartial person will blame me for any part of my
conduct; but if they should, I do not repent it. If I should forfeit the
favour of the rich and great, I shall have acquitted myself to God and
my conscience. I have no worldly ends to answer; I plead the cause of
the injured orphan; and I think, also, that I second the designs of
Providence.”

“You have well spoken, father,” said the Lord Clifford; “your testimony
is indeed of consequence.

“It is amazing and convincing,” said Lord Graham; “and the whole story
is so well connected, that I can see nothing to make us doubt the truth
of it; but let us examine the proofs.”

Edmund gave into their hands the necklace and earrings; he showed them
the locket with the cypher of Lovel, and the seal with the arms; he
told them the cloak, in which he was wrapped, was in the custody of
his foster-mother, who would produce it on demand. He begged that some
proper persons might be commissioned to go with him to examine whether
or no the bodies of his parents were buried where he affirmed; adding,
that he put his pretensions into their hands with pleasure, relying
entirely upon their honour and justice.

During this interesting scene, the criminal covered his face, and was
silent; but he sent forth bitter sighs and groans that denoted the
anguish of his heart. At length, Lord Graham, in compassion to him,
proposed that they should retire and consider of the proofs; adding,
“Lord Lovel must needs be fatigued; we will resume the subject in his
presence, when he is disposed to receive us.”

Sir Philip Harclay approached the bed; “Sir,” said he, “I now leave you
in the hands of your own relations; they are men of strict honour, and I
confide in them to take care of you and of your concerns.”

They then went out of the room, leaving only the Lord Fitz-Owen and
his sons with the criminal. They discoursed of the wonderful story of
Edmund’s birth, and the principal events of his life.

After dinner, Sir Philip requested another conference with the Lords,
and their principal friends. There were present also Father Oswald,
and Lord Graham’s confessor, who had taken the Lord Lovel’s confession,
Edmund, and Zadisky. “Now, gentlemen,” said Sir Philip, “I desire to
know your opinion of our proofs, and your advice upon them.”

Lord Graham replied, “I am desired to speak for the rest. We think there
are strong presumptive proofs that this young man is the true heir of
Lovel; but they ought to be confirmed and authenticated. Of the murder
of the late Lord there is no doubt; the criminal hath confessed it, and
the circumstances confirm it; the proofs of his crime are so connected
with those of the young man’s birth, that one cannot be public without
the other. We are desirous to do justice; and yet are unwilling, for
the Lord Fitz-Owen’s sake, to bring the criminal to public shame and
punishment. We wish to find out a medium; we therefore desire Sir
Philip to make proposals for his ward, and let Lord Fitz-Owen answer for
himself and his brother, and we will be moderators between them.”

Here every one expressed approbation, and called upon Sir Philip to make
his demands.

“If,” said he, “I were to demand strict justice, I should not be
satisfied with any thing less than the life of the criminal; but I am a
Christian soldier, the disciple of Him who came into the world to save
sinners;--for His sake,” continued he, crossing himself, “I forego my
revenge, I spare the guilty. If Heaven gives him time for repentance,
man should not deny it. It is my ward’s particular request, that I will
not bring shame upon the house of his benefactor, the Lord Fitz-Owen,
for whom he hath a filial affection and profound veneration. My
proposals are these:--First, that the criminal make restitution of the
title and estate, obtained with so much injustice and cruelty, to the
lawful heir, whom he shall acknowledge such before proper witnesses.
Secondly, that he shall surrender his own lawful inheritance and
personal estate into the hands of the Lord Fitz-Owen, in trust for his
sons, who are his heirs of blood. Thirdly, that he shall retire into a
religious house, or else quit the kingdom in three months time; and,
in either case, those who enjoy his fortune shall allow him a decent
annuity, that he may not want the comforts of life. By the last, I
disable him from the means of doing further mischief, and enable him to
devote the remainder of his days to penitence. These are my proposals,
and I give him four-and-twenty hours to consider of them; if he refuses
to comply with them, I shall be obliged to proceed to severer measures,
and to a public prosecution. But the goodness of the Lord Fitz-Owen
bids me expect, from his influence with his brother, a compliance with
proposals made out of respect to his honourable character.”

Lord Graham applauded the humanity, prudence, and piety of Sir Philip’s
proposals. He enforced them with all his influence and eloquence. Lord
Clifford seconded him; and the rest gave tokens of approbation.

Sir Robert Fitz-Owen then rose up. “I beg leave to observe to the
company, who are going to dispose so generously of another man’s
property, that my father purchased the castle and estate of the house of
Lovel; who is to repay him the money for it?”

Sir Philip then said, “I have also a question to ask. Who is to pay
the arrears of my ward’s estate, which he has unjustly been kept out of
these one-and-twenty years? Let Lord Clifford answer to both points, for
he is not interested in either.”

Lord Clifford smiled.

“I think,” returned he, “the first question is answered by the second,
and that the parties concerned should set one against the other,
especially as Lord Fitz-Owen’s children will inherit the fortune, which
includes the purchase-money.”

Lord Graham said, “This determination is both equitable and generous,
and I hope will answer the expectations on all sides.”

“I have another proposal to make to my Lord Fitz-Owen,” said Sir Philip;
“but I first wait for the acceptance of those already made.”

Lord Fitz-Owen replied, “I shall report them to my brother, and acquaint
the company with his resolution to-morrow.”

They then separated; and the Baron, with his sons, returned to the
sick man’s chamber; there he exhorted his brother, with the piety of a
confessor, to repent of his sins and make atonement for them. He made
known Sir Philip’s proposals, and observed on the wonderful discovery
of his crime, and the punishment that followed it. “Your repentance,”
 continued he, “may be accepted, and your crime may yet be pardoned. If
you continue refractory, and refuse to make atonement, you will draw
down upon you a severer punishment.”

The criminal would not confess, and yet could not deny, the truth
and justice of his observations. The Baron spent several hours in his
brother’s chamber. He sent for a priest, who took his confession; and
they both sat up with him all night, advising, persuading, and exhorting
him to do justice, and to comply with the proposals. He was unwilling to
give up the world, and yet more so to become the object of public shame,
disgrace, and punishment.

The next day, Lord Fitz-Owen summoned the company into his brother’s
chamber, and there declared, in his name, that he accepted Sir Philip
Harclay’s proposals; that, if the young man could, as he promised,
direct them to the places where his parents were buried, and if his
birth should be authenticated by his foster-parents, he should be
acknowledged the heir of the house of Lovel. That to be certified of
these things, they must commission proper persons to go with him for
this purpose; and, in case the truth should be made plain, they should
immediately put him in possession of the castle and estate, in the
state it was. He desired Lord Graham and Lord Clifford to chuse the
commissioners, and gave Sir Philip and Edmund a right to add to them,
each, another person. [sic]

Lord Graham named the eldest son of Lord Clifford, and the other, in
return, named his nephew; they also chose the priest, Lord Graham’s
confessor, and the eldest son of Baron Fitz-Owen, to his great
mortification. Sir Philip appointed Mr. William Fitz-Owen, and Edmund
named father Oswald; they chose out the servants to attend them,
who were also to be witnesses of all that should pass. Lord Clifford
proposed to Baron Fitz-Owen, that, as soon as the commissioners were
set out, the remainder of the company should adjourn to his seat in
Cumberland, whither Lord Graham should be invited to accompany them, and
to stay till this affair was decided. After some debate, this was agreed
to; and, at the same time, that the criminal should be kept with them
till every thing was properly settled.

Lord Fitz-Owen gave his son William the charge to receive and entertain
the commissioners at the castle; But, before they set out, Sir Philip
had a conference with Lord Fitz-Owen, concerning the surrender of the
castle; in which he insisted on the furniture and stock of the farm,
in consideration of the arrears. Lord Fitz-Owen slightly mentioned the
young man’s education and expences. Sir Philip answered, “You are right,
my Lord; I had not thought of this point; we owe you, in this respect,
more than we can ever repay. But you know not half the respect and
affection Edmund bears for you. When restitution of his title and
fortune are fully made, his happiness will still depend on you.”

“How on me?” said the Baron.

“Why, he will not be happy unless you honour him with your notice and
esteem; but this is not all, I must hope that you will do still more for
him.”

“Indeed,” said the Baron, “he has put my regard for him to a severe
proof; what further can he expect from me?”

“My dear Lord, be not offended, I have only one more proposal to make to
you; if you refuse it, I can allow for you; and I confess it requires a
greatness of mind, but not more than you possess, to grant it.”

“Well, sir, speak your demand.”

“Say rather my request; it is this: Cease to look upon Edmund as the
enemy of your house; look upon him as a son, and make him so indeed.”

“How say you, Sir Philip? my son!”

“Yes, my lord, give him your daughter. He is already your son in filial
affection; your son William and he are sworn brothers; what remains but
to make him yours? He deserves such a parent, you such a son; and you
will, by this means, ingraft into your family, the name, title, and
estate of Lovel, which will be entailed on your posterity for ever.”

“This offer requires much consideration,” returned the Baron.

“Suffer me to suggest some hints to you,” said Sir Philip. “This match
is, I think, verily pointed out by Providence, which hath conducted the
dear boy through so many dangers, and brought him within view of his
happiness; look on him as the precious relic of a noble house, the son
of my dearest friend! or look on him as my son and heir, and let me, as
his father, implore you to consent to his marriage with your daughter.”

The Baron’s heart was touched, he turned away his face.

“Oh, Sir Philip Harclay, what a friend are you! why should such a man be
our enemy?”

“My lord,” said Sir Philip, “we are not, cannot be enemies; our hearts
are already allied; and I am certain we shall one day be dear friends.”

The Baron suppressed his emotions, but Sir Philip saw into his heart.

“I must consult my eldest son,” returned he.

“Then,” replied Sir Philip, “I foresee much difficulty; he is prejudiced
against Edmund, and thinks the restitution of his inheritance an injury
to your family. Hereafter he will see this alliance in a different
light, and will rejoice that such a brother is added to the family;
but, at present, he will set his face against it. However, we will not
despair; virtue and resolution will surmount all obstacles. Let me call
in young Lovel.”

He brought Edmund to the Baron, and acquainted him with the proposal he
had been making in his name, my Lord’s answers, and the objections he
feared on the part of Sir Robert. Edmund kneeled to the Baron; he took
his hand and pressed it to his lips.

“Best of men! of parents! of patrons!” said he, “I will ever be your son
in filial affection, whether I have the honour to be legally so or
not; not one of your own children can feel a stronger sense of love and
duty.”

“Tell me,” said the Baron, “do you love my daughter?”

“I do, my lord, with the most ardent affection; I never loved any woman
but her; and, if I am so unfortunate as to be refused her, I will not
marry at all. Oh, my Lord, reject not my honest suit! Your alliance will
give me consequence with myself, it will excite me to act worthy of the
station to which I am exalted; if you refuse me, I shall seem an abject
wretch, disdained by those whom my heart claims relation to; your family
are the whole world to me. Give me your lovely daughter! give me also
your son, my beloved William; and let me share with them the fortune
Providence bestows upon me. But what is title or fortune, if I am
deprived of the society of those I love?”

“Edmund,” said the Baron, “you have a noble friend; but you have a
stronger in my heart, which I think was implanted there by Heaven to aid
its own purposes. I feel a variety of emotions of different kinds, and
am afraid to trust my own heart with you. But answer me a question: Are
you assured of my daughter’s consent? have you solicited her favour?
have you gained her affections?”

“Never, my lord. I am incapable of so base an action; I have loved her
at an humble distance; but, in my situation, I should have thought it a
violation of all the laws of gratitude and hospitality to have presumed
to speak the sentiments of my heart.”

“Then you have acted with unquestionable honour on this, and, I must
say, on all other occasions.”

“Your approbation, my lord, is the first wish of my life; it is the seal
of my honour and happiness.”

Sir Philip smiled: “My Lord Fitz-Owen, I am jealous of Edmund’s
preferable regard for you; it is just the same now as formerly.”

Edmund came to Sir Philip, he threw himself into his arms, he wept, he
was overpowered with the feelings of his heart; he prayed to Heaven to
strengthen his mind to support his inexpressible sensations.

“I am overwhelmed with obligation,” said he; “oh, best of friends, teach
me, like you, to make my actions speak for me!”

“Enough, Edmund; I know your heart, and that is my security. My lord,
speak to him, and bring him to himself, by behaving coldly to him, if
you can.”

The Baron said, “I must not trust myself with you, you make a child
of me. I will only add, gain my son Robert’s favour, and be assured of
mine; I owe some respect to the heir of my family; he is brave, honest,
and sincere; your enemies are separated from him, you have William’s
influence in your behalf; make one effort, and let me know the result.”

Edmund kissed his hand in transports of joy and gratitude.

“I will not lose a moment,” said he; “I fly to obey your commands.”

Edmund went immediately to his friend William, and related all that had
passed between the Baron, Sir Philip, and himself. William promised him
his interest in the warmest manner; he recapitulated all that had passed
in the castle since his departure; but he guarded his sister’s delicacy,
till it should be resolved to give way to his address. They both
consulted young Clifford, who had conceived an affection to Edmund for
his amiable qualities, and to William for his generous friendship for
him. He promised them his assistance, as Sir Robert seemed desirous to
cultivate his friendship. Accordingly, they both attacked him with the
whole artillery of friendship and persuasion. Clifford urged the merits
of Edmund, and the advantages of his alliance. William enforced his
arguments by a retrospect of Edmund’s past life; and observed, that
every obstacle thrown in his way had brought his enemies to shame, and
increase of honour to himself. “I say nothing,” continued he, “of his
noble qualities and affectionate heart; those who have been so many
years his companions, can want no proofs of it.”

“We know your attachment to him, sir,” said Sir Robert; “and, in
consequence, your partiality.”

“Nay,” replied William, “you are sensible of the truth of my assertions;
and, I am confident, would have loved him yourself, but for the
insinuations of his enemies. But if he should make good his assertions,
even you must be convinced of his veracity.”

“And you would have my father give him your sister upon this
uncertainty?”

“No, sir, but upon these conditions.”

“But suppose he does not make them good?”

“Then I will be of your party, and give up his interest.”

“Very well, sir; my father may do as he pleases; but I cannot agree to
give my sister to one who has always stood in the way of our family, and
now turns us out of our own house.”

“I am sorry, brother, you see his pretensions in so wrong a light; but
if you think there is any imposture in the case, go with us, and be a
witness of all that passes.”

“No, not I; if Edmund is to be master of the castle, I will never more
set my foot in it.”

“This matter,” said Mr. Clifford, “must be left to time, which has
brought stranger things to pass. Sir Robert’s honour and good sense will
enable him to subdue his prejudices, and to judge impartially.”

They took leave, and went to make preparations for their journey. Edmund
made his report of Sir Robert’s inflexibility to his father, in presence
of Sir Philip; who, again, ventured to urge the Baron on his favourite
subject.

“It becomes me to wait for the further proofs,” said he; “but, if they
are as clear as I expect, I will not be inexorable to your wishes; Say
nothing more on this subject till the return of the commissioners.”

They were profuse in their acknowledgments of his goodness.

Edmund took a tender leave of his two paternal friends.

“When,” said he, “I take possession of my inheritance, I must hope for
the company of you both to complete my happiness.”

“Of me,” said Sir Philip, “you may be certain; and, as far as my
influence reaches, of the Baron.”

He was silent. Edmund assured them of his constant prayers for their
happiness.

Soon after, the commissioners, with Edmund, set out for Lovel Castle;
and the following day the Lord Clifford set out for his own house, with
Baron Fitz-Owen and his son. The nominal Baron was carried with them,
very much against his will. Sir Philip Harclay was invited to go with
them by Lord Clifford, who declared his presence necessary to bring
things to a conclusion. They all joined in acknowledging their
obligations to Lord Graham’s generous hospitality, and besought him to
accompany them. At length he consented, on condition they would allow
him to go to and fro, as his duty should call him.

Lord Clifford received them with the greatest hospitality, and presented
them to his lady, and three daughters, who were in the bloom of youth
and beauty. They spent their time very pleasantly, excepting the
criminal, who continued gloomy and reserved, and declined company.

In the mean time, the commissioners proceeded on their journey. When
they were within a day’s distance from the castle, Mr. William and his
servant put forward, and arrived several hours before the rest, to make
preparations for their reception. His sister and brother received them
with open arms, and enquired eagerly after the event of the journey to
the North. He gave them a brief account of every thing that had happened
to their uncle; adding, “But this is not all: Sir Philip Harclay has
brought a young man who he pretends is the son of the late Lord Lovel,
and claims his estate and title. This person is on his journey hither,
with several others who are commissioned to enquire into certain
particulars, to confirm his pretensions. If he make good his claim, my
father will surrender the castle and estate into his hands. Sir
Philip and my lord have many points to settle; and he has proposed
a compromise, that you, my sister, ought to know, because it nearly
concerns you.”

“Me! brother William; pray explain yourself.”

“Why, he proposes that, in lieu of arrears and other expectations, my
father shall give his dear Emma to the heir of Lovel, in full of all
demands.”

 She changed colour.

“Holy Mary!” said she; “and does my father agree to this proposal?”

“He is not very averse to it; but Sir Robert refuses his consent.
However, I have given him my interest with you.”

“Have you indeed? What! a stranger, perhaps an impostor, who comes to
turn us out of our dwelling?”

“Have patience, my Emma! see this young man without prejudice, and
perhaps you will like him as well as I do.”

“I am surprised at you, William.”

“Dear Emma, I cannot bear to see you uneasy. Think of the man who of all
others you would with to see in a situation to ask you of your father,
and expect to see your wishes realized.”

“Impossible!” said she.

“Nothing is impossible, my dear; let us be prudent, and all will end
happily. You must help me to receive and entertain these commissioners.
I expect a very solemn scene; but when that is once got over, happier
hours than the past will succeed. We shall first visit the haunted
apartment; you, my sister, will keep in your own till I shall send for
you. I go now to give orders to the servants.”

He went and ordered them to be in waiting; and himself, and his youngest
brother, stood in readiness to receive them.

The sound of the horn announced the arrival of the commissioners; at
the same instant a sudden gust of wind arose, and the outward gates flew
open. They entered the court-yard, and the great folding-doors into the
hall were opened without any assistance. The moment Edmund entered the
hall, every door in the house flew open; the servants all rushed into
the hall, and fear was written on their countenances; Joseph only was
undaunted. “These doors,” said he, “open of their own accord to receive
their master! this is he indeed!”

Edmund was soon apprized of what had happened.

“I accept the omen!” said he. “Gentlemen, let us go forward to the
apartment! let us finish the work of fate! I will lead the way.” He went
on to the apartment, followed by all present. “Open the shutters,”
 said he, “the daylight shall no longer be excluded here; the deeds of
darkness shall now be brought to light.”

They descended the staircase; every door was open, till they came to the
fatal closet. Edmund called to Mr. William: “Approach, my friend, and
behold the door your family overlooked!”

They came forward; he drew the key out of his bosom, and unlocked the
door; he made them observe that the boards were all loose; he then
called to the servants, and bid them remove every thing out of the
closet. While they were doing this, Edmund shewed them the breastplate
all stained with blood. He then called to Joseph:--

“Do you know whose 