was this suit of armour?”

“It was my Lord’s,” said Joseph; “the late Lord Lovel; I have seen him
wear it.”

Edmund bade them bring shovels and remove the earth. While they were
gone, he desired Oswald to repeat all that passed the night they sat
up together in that apartment, which he did till the servants returned.
They threw out the earth, while the by-standers in solemn silence waited
the event. After some time and labour they struck against something.
They proceeded till they discovered a large trunk, which with some
difficulty they drew out. It had been corded round, but the cords were
rotted to dust. They opened it, and found a skeleton which appeared to
have been tied neck and heels together, and forced into the trunk.

“Behold,” said Edmund, “the bones of him to whom I owe my birth!”

The priest from Lord Graham’s advanced. “This is undoubtedly the body of
the Lord Lovel; I heard his kinsman confess the manner in which he was
interred. Let this awful spectacle be a lesson to all present, that
though wickedness may triumph for a season, a day of retribution will
come!”

Oswald exclaimed. “Behold the day of retribution! of triumph to the
innocent, of shame and confusion to the wicked!”

The young gentlemen declared that Edmund had made good his assertions.

“What then,” said they, “remains?”

“I propose,” said Lord Graham’s priest, “that an account be written
of this discovery, and signed by all the witnesses present; that an
attested copy be left in the hands of this gentleman, and the original
be sent to the Barons and Sir Philip Harclay, to convince them of the
truth of it.”

Mr. Clifford then desired Edmund to proceed in his own way.

“The first thing I propose to do,” said he, “is to have a coffin made
for these honoured remains. I trust to find the bones of my other
parent, and to inter them all together in consecrated ground.
Unfortunate pair! you shall at last rest together! your son shall pay
the last duties to your ashes!”

He stopped to shed tears, and none present but paid this tribute to
their misfortunes. Edmund recovered his voice and proceeded.

“My next request is, that Father Oswald and this reverend father, with
whoever else the gentlemen shall appoint, will send for Andrew and
Margery Twyford, and examine them concerning the circumstances of my
birth, and the death and burial of my unfortunate mother.”

“It shall be done,” said Mr. William; “but first let me intreat you to
come with me and take some refreshment after your journey, for you must
be fatigued; after dinner we will proceed in the enquiry.”

They all followed him into the great hall, where they were entertained
with great hospitality, and Mr. William did the honours in his father’s
name. Edmund’s heart was deeply affected, and the solemnity of his
deportment bore witness to his sincerity; but it was a manly sorrow,
that did not make him neglect his duty to his friends or himself. He
enquired after the health of the lady Emma.

“She is well,” said William, “and as much your friend as ever.”

Edmund bowed in silence.

After dinner the commissioners sent for Andrew and his wife. They
examined them separately, and found their accounts agreed together,
and were in substance the same as Oswald and Edmund had before related,
separately also. The commissioners observed, that there could be no
collusion between them, and that the proofs were indisputable. They kept
the foster parents all night; and the next day Andrew directed them to
the place where the Lady Lovel was buried, between two trees which he
had marked for a memorial. They collected the bones and carried them
to the Castle, where Edmund caused a stately coffin to be made for the
remains of the unfortunate pair. The two priests obtained leave to look
in the coffin buried in the church, and found nothing but stones and
earth in it. The commissioners then declared they were fully satisfied
of the reality of Edmund’s pretensions.

The two priests were employed in drawing up a circumstantial account of
these discoveries, in order to make their report to the Barons at their
return. In the mean time Mr. William took an opportunity to introduce
Edmund to his sister.

“My Emma,” said he, “the heir of Lovel is desirous to pay his respects
to you.”

They were both in apparent confusion; but Edmund’s wore off, and Emma’s
increased.

“I have been long desirous,” said he, “to pay my respects to the lady
whom I most honour, but unavoidable duties have detained me; when these
are fully paid, it is my wish to devote the remainder of my life to Lady
Emma!”

“Are you, then, the heir of Lovel?”

“I am, madam; and am also the man in whose behalf I once presumed to
speak.”

“‘Tis very strange indeed!”

“It is so, madam, to myself; but time that reconciles us to all things,
will, I hope, render this change in my situation familiar to you.”

William said, “You are both well acquainted with the wishes of my heart;
but my advice is, that you do not encourage a farther intimacy till my
lord’s determination be fully known.”

“You may dispose of me as you please,” said Edmund; “but I cannot help
declaring my wishes; yet I will submit to my Lord’s sentence, though he
should doom me to despair.”

From this period, the young pair behaved with solemn respect to each
other, but with apparent reserve. The young lady sometimes appeared in
company, but oftener chose to be in her own apartment, where she began
to believe and hope for the completion of her wishes. The uncertainty of
the Baron’s determination, threw an air of anxiety over Edmund’s face.
His friend William, by the most tender care and attention, strove to
dispel his fears, and encourage his hopes; but he waited with impatience
for the return of the commissioners, and the decision of his fate.

While these things passed at the Castle of Lovel, the nominal Baron
recovered his health and strength at the house of Lord Clifford. In
the same proportion he grew more and more shy and reserved, avoided the
company of his brother and nephew, and was frequently shut up with his
two servants. Sir Robert Fitz-Owen made several attempts to gain his
confidence, but in vain; he was equally shy to him as the rest.
M. Zadisky observed his motions with the penetration for which his
countrymen have been distinguished in all ages; he communicated his
suspicions to Sir Philip and the Barons, giving it as his opinion, that
the criminal was meditating an escape. They asked, what he thought was
to be done? Zadisky offered to watch him in turn with another person,
and to lie in wait for him; he also proposed, that horses should be kept
in readiness, and men to mount them, without knowledge of the service
they were to be employed in. The Barons agreed to leave the whole
management of this affair to Zadisky. He took his measures so well, that
he intercepted the three fugitives in the fields adjoining to the house,
and brought them all back prisoner. They confined them separately, while
the Lords and Gentlemen consulted how to dispose of them.

Sir Philip applied to Lord Fitz-Owen, who begged leave to be silent.
“I have nothing,” said he, “to offer in favour of this bad man; and I
cannot propose harsher measures with so near a relation.”

Zadisky then begged to be heard.

“You can no longer have any reliance upon the word of a man who has
forfeited all pretensions to honour and sincerity. I have long wished to
revisit once more my native country, and to enquire after some very
dear friends I left there. I will undertake to convey this man to a
very distant part of the world, where it will be out of his power to
do further mischief, and free his relations from an ungrateful charge,
unless you should rather chuse to bring him to punishment here.”

Lord Clifford approved of the proposal; Lord Fitz-Owen remained silent,
but shewed no marks of disapprobation.

Sir Philip objected to parting with his friend; but Zadisky assured him
he had particular reasons for returning to the Holy Land, of which he
should be judge hereafter. Sir Philip desired the Lord Fitz-Owen to give
him his company to the criminal’s apartment, saying, “We will have one
more conversation with him, and that shall decide his fate.”

They found him silent and sullen, and he refused to answer their
questions.

Sir Philip then bespoke him: “After the proofs you have given of your
falsehood and insincerity, we can no longer have any reliance upon you,
nor faith in your fulfilling the conditions of our agreement; I will,
therefore, once more make you a proposal that shall still leave you
indebted to our clemency. You shall banish yourself from England for
ever, and go in pilgrimage to the Holy Land, with such companions as we
shall appoint; or, secondly, you shall enter directly into a monastery,
and there be shut up for life; or, thirdly, if you refuse both these
offers, I will go directly to court, throw myself at the feet of my
Sovereign, relate the whole story of your wicked life and actions, and
demand vengeance on your head. The King is too good and pious to let
such villany go unpunished; he will bring you to public shame and
punishment; and be you assured, if I begin this prosecution, I will
pursue it to the utmost. I appeal to your worthy brother for the
justice of my proceeding. I reason no more with you, I only declare my
resolution. I wait your answer one hour, and the next I put in execution
whatever you shall oblige me to determine.”

So saying, they retired, and left him to reflect and to resolve. At
the expiration of the hour they sent Zadisky to receive his answer;
he insinuated to him the generosity and charity of Sir Philip and the
Lords, and the certainty of their resolutions, and begged him to take
care what answer he returned, for that his fate depended on it. He
kept silent several minutes, resentment and despair were painted on his
visage. At length he spoke:--

“Tell my proud enemies that I prefer banishment to death, infamy, or a
life of solitude.”

“You have chosen well,” said Zadisky. “To a wise man all countries are
alike; it shall be my care to make mine agreeable to you.”

“Are you, then, the person chosen for my companion?”

“I am, sir; and you may judge by that circumstance, that those whom you
call your enemies, are not so in effect. Farewell, sir--I go to prepare
for our departure.”

Zadisky went and made his report, and then set immediately about his
preparations. He chose two active young men for his attendants; and gave
them directions to keep a strict eye upon their charge, for that they
should be accountable if he should escape them.

In the meantime the Baron Fitz-Owen had several conferences with his
brother; he endeavoured to make him sensible of his crimes, and of the
justice and clemency of his conqueror; but he was moody and reserved
to him as to the rest. Sir Philip Harclay obliged him to surrender his
worldly estates into the hands of Lord Fitz-Owen. A writing was drawn
up for that purpose, and executed in the presence of them all. Lord
Fitz-Owen engaged to allow him an annual sum, and to advance money for
the expences of his voyage. He spoke to him in the most affectionate
manner, but he refused his embrace.

“You will have nothing to regret,” said he, haughtily, “for the gain is
yours.”

Sir Philip conjured Zadisky to return to him again, who answered:

“I will either return, or give such reasons for my stay, as you shall
approve. I will send a messenger to acquaint you with my arrival in
Syria, and with such other particulars as I shall judge interesting to
you and yours. In the meantime remember me in your prayers, and preserve
for me those sentiments of friendship and esteem, that I have always
deemed one of the chief honours and blessings of my life. Commend my
love and duty to your adopted son; he will more than supply my absence,
and be the comfort of your old age. Adieu, best and noblest of friends!”

They took a tender leave of each other, not without tears on both sides.

The travellers set out directly for a distant seaport where they heard
of a ship bound for the Levant, in which they embarked and proceeded on
their voyage.

The Commissioners arrived at Lord Clifford’s a few days after the
departure of the adventurers. They gave a minute account of their
commission, and expressed themselves entirely satisfied of the justice
of Edmund’s pretensions; they gave an account in writing of all that
they had been eyewitnesses to, and ventured to urge the Baron Fitz-Owen
on the subject of Edmund’s wishes. The Baron was already disposed in his
favour; his mind was employed in the future establishment of his family.
During their residence at Lord Clifford’s, his eldest son Sir Robert had
cast his eye upon the eldest daughter of that nobleman, and he besought
his father to ask her in marriage for him. The Baron was pleased with
the alliance, and took the first opportunity to mention it to Lord
Clifford; who answered him, pleasantly:


“I will give my daughter to your son, upon condition that you will give
yours to the Heir of Lovel.” The Baron looked serious; Lord Clifford
went on:

“I like that young man so well, that I would accept him for a
son-in-law, if he asked me for my daughter; and if I have any influence
with you, I will use it in his behalf.”

“A powerful solicitor indeed!” said the Baron; “but you know my eldest
son’s reluctance to it; if he consents, so will I.”

“He shall consent,” said Lord Clifford, “or he shall have no daughter
of mine. Let him subdue his prejudices, and then I will lay aside my
scruples.”

“But, my Lord,” replied the Baron, “if I can obtain his free consent,
it will be the best for all; I will try once more, and if he will not, I
will leave it wholly to your management.”

When the noble company were all assembled, Sir Philip Harclay revived
the subject, and besought the Lord Fitz-Owen to put an end to the work
he had begun, by confirming Edmund’s happiness. The Baron rose up, and
thus spoke:

“The proofs of Edmund’s noble birth, the still stronger ones of his
excellent endowments and qualities, the solicitations of so many noble
friends in his behalf, have altogether determined me in his favour;
and I hope to do justice to his merit, without detriment to my other
children; I am resolved to make them all as happy as my power will
allow me to do. Lord Clifford has been so gracious to promise his fair
daughter to my son Robert, upon certain conditions, that I will take
upon me to ratify, and which will render my son worthy of the happiness
that awaits him. My children are the undoubted heirs of my unhappy
brother, Lovel; you, my son, shall therefore immediately take possession
of your uncle’s house and estate, only obliging you to pay to each
of your younger brothers, the sum of one thousand pounds; on this
condition, I will secure that estate to you and your heirs for ever. I
will by my own act and deed surrender the castle and estate of Lovel to
the right owner, and at the same time marry him to my daughter. I will
settle a proper allowance upon my two younger sons, and dispose of
what remains by a will and testament; and then I shall have done all my
business in this world, and shall have nothing to do but prepare for the
next.”

“Oh, my father!” said Sir Robert, “I cannot bear your generosity! you
would give away all to others, and reserve nothing for yourself.”

“Not so, my son,” said the Baron; “I will repair my old castle in Wales,
and reside there. I will visit my children, and be visited by them; I
will enjoy their happiness, and by that means increase my own; whether I
look backwards or forwards, I shall have nothing to do but rejoice, and
be thankful to Heaven that has given me so many blessings; I shall have
the comfortable reflection of having discharged my duties as a citizen,
a husband, a father, a friend; and, whenever I am summoned away from
this world, I shall die content.”

Sir Robert came forward with tears on his cheeks; he kneeled to his
father.

“Best of parents, and of men!” said he; “you have subdued a heart that
has been too refractory to your will; you have this day made me sensible
how much I owe to your goodness and forbearance with me. Forgive me all
that is past, and from henceforward dispose of me; I will have no will
but yours, no ambition but to be worthy of the name of your son.”

“And this day,” said the Baron, “do I enjoy the true happiness of a
father! Rise, my son, and take possession of the first place in my
affection without reserve.” They embraced with tears on both sides; The
company rose, and congratulated both father and son. The Baron presented
his son to Lord Clifford, who embraced him, and said:

“You shall have my daughter, for I see that you deserve her.”

Sir Philip Harclay approached--the Baron gave his son’s hand to the
knight.

“Love and respect that good man,” said he; “deserve his friendship, and
you will obtain it.”

Nothing but congratulations were heard on all sides.

When their joy was in some degree reduced to composure, Sir Philip
proposed that they should begin to execute the schemes of happiness they
had planned. He proposed that my Lord Fitz-Owen should go with him to
the Castle of Lovel, and settle the family there. The Baron consented;
and both together invited such of the company, as liked it, to accompany
them thither. It was agreed that a nephew of Lord Graham’s, another
of Lord Clifford’s, two gentlemen, friends of Sir Philip Harclay, and
father Oswald, should be of the party; together with several of Sir
Philip’s dependants and domestics, and the attendants on the rest. Lord
Fitz Owen gave orders for their speedy departure. Lord Graham and his
friends took leave of them, in order to return to his own home; but,
before he went, he engaged his eldest nephew and heir to the second
daughter of the Lord Clifford; Sir Robert offered himself to the
eldest, who modestly received his address, and made no objection to his
proposal. The fathers confirmed their engagement.

Lord Fitz-Owen promised to return to the celebration of the marriage;
in the mean time he ordered his son to go and take possession of his
uncle’s house, and to settle his household; He invited young Clifford,
and some other gentlemen, to go with him. The company separated with
regret, and with many promises of friendship on all sides; and the
gentlemen of the North were to cultivate the good neighbourhood on both
sides of the borders.

Sir Philip Harclay and the Baron Fitz-Owen, with their friends and
attendants, set forwards for the Castle of Lovel; a servant went before,
at full speed, to acquaint the family of their approach. Edmund was in
great anxiety of mind, now the crisis of his fate was near at hand; He
enquired of the messenger, who were of the party? and finding that Sir
Philip Harclay was there, and that Sir Robert Fitz-Owen stayed in
the North, his hopes rose above his fears. Mr. William, attended by
a servant, rode forward to meet them; he desired Edmund to stay and
receive them. Edmund was under some difficulty with regard to his
behaviour to the lovely Emma; a thousand times his heart rose to his
lips, as often he suppressed his emotions; they both sighed frequently,
said little, thought much, and wished for the event. Master Walter was
too young to partake of their anxieties, but he wished for the arrival
of his father to end them.

Mr. William’s impatience spurred him on to meet his father; as soon as
he saw him, he rode up directly to him.

“My dear father, you are welcome home!” said he.

“I think not, sir,” said the Baron, and looked serious.

“Why so, my lord?” said William.

“Because it is no longer mine, but another man’s home,” answered he,
“and I must receive my welcome from him.”

“Meaning Edmund?” said William.

“Whom else can it be?”

“Ah, my Lord! he is your creature, your servant; he puts his fate into
your hands, and will submit to your pleasure in all things!”

“Why comes he not to meet us?” said the Baron.

“His fears prevent him,” said William; “but speak the word, and I will
fetch him.”

“No,” said the Baron, “we will wait on him.”

William looked confused.

“Is Edmund so unfortunate,” said he, “as to have incurred your
displeasure?”

Sir Philip Harclay advanced, and laid his hand on William’s saddle.

“Generous impatience! noble youth!” said he; “look round you, and see if
you can discover in this company one enemy of your friend! Leave to your
excellent father the time and manner of explaining himself; he only can
do justice to his own sentiments.”

The Baron smiled on Sir Philip; William’s countenance cleared up; they
went forward, and soon arrived at the Castle of Lovel.

Edmund was walking to and fro in the hall, when he heard the horn that
announced their arrival; his emotions were so great that he could hardly
support them. The Baron and Sir Philip entered the hall hand in hand;
Edmund threw himself at their feet, and embraced their knees, but could
not utter a word. They raised him between them, and strove to encourage
him; but he threw himself into the arms of Sir Philip Harclay, deprived
of strength, and almost of life. They supported him to a seat, where he
recovered by degrees, but had no power to speak his feelings; he looked
up to his benefactors in the most affecting manner, he laid his hand
upon his bosom, but was still silent.

“Compose yourself, my dear son,” said Sir Philip; “you are in the arms
of your best friends. Look up to the happiness that awaits you--enjoy
the blessings that Heaven sends you--lift up your heart in gratitude to
the Creator, and think left of what you owe to the creature! You will
have time enough to pay us your acknowledgments hereafter.”

The company came round them, the servants flocked into the hall: shouts
of joy were heard on all sides; the Baron came and took Edmund’s hand.

“Rise, sir,” said he, “and do the honours of your house! it is yours
from this day: we are your guests, and expect from you our welcome!”

Edmund kneeled to the Baron, he spoke with a faltering voice:

“My Lord, I am yours! all that I have is at your devotion! dispose of me
as it pleases you best.”

The Baron embraced him with the greatest affection.

“Look round you,” said he, “and salute your friends; these gentlemen
came hither to do you honour.”

Edmund revived, he embraced and welcomed the gentlemen. Father
Oswald received his embrace with peculiar affection, and gave him his
benediction in a most affecting manner.

Edmund exclaimed, “Pray for me, father! that I may bear all these
blessings with gratitude and moderation!”

He then saluted and shook hands with all the servants, not omitting the
meanest; he distinguished Joseph by a cordial embrace; he called him his
dear friend.

“Now,” said he, “I can return your friendship, and I am proud to
acknowledge it!”

The old man, with a faltering voice, cried out:

“Now I have lived long enough! I have seen my master’s son acknowledged
for the heir of Lovel!”

The hall echoed with his words, “Long live the heir of Lovel!”

The Baron took Edmund’s hands in his own:

“Let us retire from this crowd,” said he; “we have business of a more
private nature to transact.”

He led to the parlour, followed by Sir Philip and the other gentlemen.

“Where are my other children?” said he.

William retired, and presently returned with his brother and sister.
They kneeled to their father, who raised and embraced them. He then
called out, “William!--Edmund!--come and receive my blessing also.”

They approached hand in hand, they kneeled, and he gave them a solemn
benediction.

“Your friendship deserves our praise, my children! love each other
always! and may Heaven pour down its choicest blessings upon your
heads!”

They rose, and embraced in silent raptures of joy. Edmund presented his
friend to Sir Philip.

“I understand you,” said he; “this gentleman was my first acquaintance
of this family; he has a title to the second place in my heart; I shall
tell him, at more leisure, how much I love and honour him for his own
sake as well as yours.”

He embraced the youth, and desired his friendship.

“Come hither, my Emma!” said the Baron.

She approached with tears on her check, sweetly blushing, like the
damask rose wet with the dew of the morning.

“I must ask you a serious question, my child; answer me with the same
sincerity you would to Heaven. You see this young man, the heir of
Lovel! You have known him long; consult your own heart, and tell me
whether you have any objection to receive him for your husband. I have
promised to all this company to give you to him; but upon condition that
you approve him: I think him worthy of you; and, whether you accept him
or not, he shall ever be to me a son; but Heaven forbid that I should
compel my child to give her hand, where she cannot bestow her heart!
Speak freely, and decide this point for me and for yourself.”

The fair Emma blushed, and was under some confusion; her virgin modesty
prevented her speaking for some moments. Edmund trembled; he leaned upon
William’s shoulder to support himself. Emma cast her eye upon him, she
saw his emotion, and hastened to relieve him; and thus spoke in a soft
voice which gathered strength as she proceeded:

“My lord and father’s goodness has always prevented my wishes; I am the
happiest of all children, in being able to obey his commands, without
offering violence to my own inclinations. As I am called upon in this
public manner, it is but justice to this gentleman’s merit to declare,
that, were I at liberty to chuse a husband from all the world, he only
should be my choice, who I can say, with joy, is my father’s also.”

Edmund bowed low, he advanced towards her; the Baron took his daughter’s
hand, and presented it to him; he kneeled upon one knee, he took her
hand, kissed it, and pressed it to his bosom. The Baron embraced and
blessed them; he presented them to Sir Philip Harclay--“Receive and
acknowledge your children!” said he.

“I do receive them as the gift of Heaven!” said the noble knight; “they
are as much mine as if I had begotten them: all that I have is theirs,
and shall descend to their children for ever.” A fresh scene of
congratulation ensued; and the hearts of all the auditors were too much
engaged to be able soon to return to the ease and tranquillity of common
life.

After they had refreshed themselves, and recovered from the emotions
they had sustained on this interesting occasion, Edmund thus addressed
the Baron:

“On the brink of happiness I must claim your attention to a melancholy
subject. The bones of both my parents lie unburied in this house;
permit me, my honoured lord, to perform my last duties to them, and the
remainder of my life shall be devoted to you and yours.”

“Certainly,” said the Baron; “why have you not interred them?”

“My lord, I waited for your arrival, that you might be certified of the
reality, and that no doubts might remain.”

“I have no doubts,” said the Baron; “Alas! both the crime and punishment
of the offender leave no room for them!” He sighed. “Let us now put an
end to this affair; and, if possible, forget it for ever.”

“If it will not be too painful to you, my lord, I would intreat you,
with these gentlemen our friends, to follow me into the east apartment,
the scene of my parents’ woes, and yet the dawning of my better hopes.”

They rose to attend him; he committed the Lady Emma to the care of her
youngest brother, observing that the scene was too solemn for a lady to
be present at it. They proceeded to the apartment; he showed the Baron
the fatal closet, and the place where the bones were found, also the
trunk that contained them; he recapitulated all that passed before their
arrival; he shewed them the coffin where the bones of the unfortunate
pair were deposited: he then desired the Baron to give orders for their
interment.

“No,” replied he, “it belongs to you to order, and every one here is
ready to perform it.”

Edmund then desired father Oswald to give notice to the friars of the
monastery of St. Austin, that with their permission the funeral should
be solemnized there, and the bones interred in the church. He also gave
orders that the closet should be floored, the apartment repaired and put
in order. He then returned to the other side of the Castle.

Preparations being made for the funeral, it was performed a few days
after. Edmund attended in person as chief mourner, Sir Philip Harclay as
the second; Joseph desired he might assist as servant to the deceased.
They were followed by most people of the village. The story was now
become public, and every one blessed Edmund for the piety and devotion
with which he performed the last duties to his parents.--Edmund appeared
in deep mourning; the week after, he assisted at a mass for the repose
of the deceased.

Sir Philip Harclay ordered a monument to be erected to the memory of his
friends, with the following inscription:

“Praye for the soules of Arthur Lord Lovele and Marie his wife, who were
cut off in the flowere of theire youthe, by the trecherye and crueltie
of theire neare kinnesmanne. Edmunde theire onlie sonne, one and twentie
yeares after theire deathe, by the direction of heavene, made the
discoverye of the mannere of theire deathe, and at the same time proved
his owne birthe. He collected theire bones together, and interred them
in this place: A warning and proofe to late posteritie, of the justice
of Providence, and the certaintie of Retribution.”

The Sunday after the funeral Edmund threw off his mourning, and appeared
in a dress suitable to his condition. He received the compliments of his
friends with ease and cheerfulness, and began to enjoy his happiness. He
asked an audience of his fair mistress, and was permitted to declare
the passion he had so long stifled in his own bosom. She gave him a
favourable hearing, and in a short time confessed that she had suffered
equally in that suspense that was so grievous to him. They engaged
themselves by mutual vows to each other, and only waited the Baron’s
pleasure to complete their happiness; every cloud was vanished from
their brows, and sweet tranquillity took possession of their bosoms.
Their friends shared their happiness; William and Edmund renewed their
vows of everlasting friendship, and promised to be as much together as
William’s other duties would permit.

The Baron once more summoned all his company together; he told Edmund
all that had passed relating to his brother in-law, his exile, and the
pilgrimage of Zadisky; he then related the circumstances of Sir Robert’s
engagement to Lord Clifford’s daughter, his establishment in his uncle’s
seat, and his own obligations to return time enough to be present at the
marriage: “But before I go,” said he, “I will give my daughter to the
heir of Lovel, and then I shall have discharged my duty to him, and my
promise to Sir Philip Harclay.”

“You have nobly performed both,” said Sir Philip, “and whenever you
depart I shall be your companion.”

“What,” said Edmund, “am I to be deprived of both my fathers at once?
My honoured lord, you have given away two houses--where do you intend to
reside?”

“No matter,” said the Baron; “I know I shall be welcome to both.”

“My dear Lord,” said Edmund, “stay here and be still the master; I shall
be proud to be under your command, and to be your servant as well as
your son!”

“No, Edmund,” said the Baron, “that would not now be proper; this is
your castle, you are its lord and master, and it is incumbent on you to
shew yourself worthy of the great things Providence has done for you.”

“How shall I, a young man, acquit myself of so many duties as will be
upon me, without the advice and assistance of my two paternal friends?
Oh, Sir Philip! will you too leave me? once you gave me hopes--”

He stopped greatly affected.

Sir Philip said, “Tell me truly, Edmund, do you really desire that I
should live with you?”

“As truly, sir, as I desire life and happiness!”

“Then, my dear child, I will live and die with you!”

They embraced with tears of affection, and Edmund was all joy and
gratitude.

“My good Lord,” said Sir Philip, “you have disposed of two houses, and
have none ready to receive you; will you accept of mine? It is much at
your service, and its being in the same county with your eldest son,
will be an inducement to you to reside there.”

The Baron caught Sir Philip’s hand.

“Noble sir, I