The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old English Baron, by Clara Reeve

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Old English Baron

Author: Clara Reeve

Release Date: February, 2004  [EBook #5182]
Posting Date: April 23, 2009
Last Updated: November 19, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD ENGLISH BARON ***




Produced by Jack Voller








THE OLD ENGLISH BARON


By Clara Reeve




PREFACE



As this Story is of a species which, though not new, is out of
the common track, it has been thought necessary to point out some
circumstances to the reader, which will elucidate the design, and, it is
hoped, will induce him to form a favourable, as well as a right judgment
of the work before him.

This Story is the literary offspring of The Castle of Otranto, written
upon the same plan, with a design to unite the most attractive and
interesting circumstances of the ancient Romance and modern Novel, at
the same time it assumes a character and manner of its own, that differs
from both; it is distinguished by the appellation of a Gothic Story,
being a picture of Gothic times and manners. Fictitious stories have
been the delight of all times and all countries, by oral tradition in
barbarous, by writing in more civilized ones; and although some persons
of wit and learning have condemned them indiscriminately, I would
venture to affirm, that even those who so much affect to despise them
under one form, will receive and embrace them under another.

Thus, for instance, a man shall admire and almost adore the Epic poems
of the Ancients, and yet despise and execrate the ancient Romances,
which are only Epics in prose.

History represents human nature as it is in real life, alas, too often
a melancholy retrospect! Romance displays only the amiable side of the
picture; it shews the pleasing features, and throws a veil over the
blemishes: Mankind are naturally pleased with what gratifies their
vanity; and vanity, like all other passions of the human heart, may be
rendered subservient to good and useful purposes.

I confess that it may be abused, and become an instrument to corrupt the
manners and morals of mankind; so may poetry, so may plays, so may
every kind of composition; but that will prove nothing more than the
old saying lately revived by the philosophers the most in fashion, “that
every earthly thing has two handles.”

The business of Romance is, first, to excite the attention; and
secondly, to direct it to some useful, or at least innocent, end: Happy
the writer who attains both these points, like Richardson! and not
unfortunate, or undeserving praise, he who gains only the latter, and
furnishes out an entertainment for the reader!

Having, in some degree, opened my design, I beg leave to conduct my
reader back again, till he comes within view of The Castle of Otranto;
a work which, as already has been observed, is an attempt to unite the
various merits and graces of the ancient Romance and modern Novel.
To attain this end, there is required a sufficient degree of the
marvellous, to excite the attention; enough of the manners of real life,
to give an air of probability to the work; and enough of the pathetic,
to engage the heart in its behalf.

The book we have mentioned is excellent in the two last points, but
has a redundancy in the first; the opening excites the attention
very strongly; the conduct of the story is artful and judicious; the
characters are admirably drawn and supported; the diction polished and
elegant; yet, with all these brilliant advantages, it palls upon the
mind (though it does not upon the ear); and the reason is obvious, the
machinery is so violent, that it destroys the effect it is intended to
excite. Had the story been kept within the utmost verge of probability,
the effect had been preserved, without losing the least circumstance
that excites or detains the attention.

For instance; we can conceive, and allow of, the appearance of a ghost;
we can even dispense with an enchanted sword and helmet; but then they
must keep within certain limits of credibility: A sword so large as
to require an hundred men to lift it; a helmet that by its own weight
forces a passage through a court-yard into an arched vault, big enough
for a man to go through; a picture that walks out of its frame; a
skeleton ghost in a hermit’s cowl:--When your expectation is wound up
to the highest pitch, these circumstances take it down with a witness,
destroy the work of imagination, and, instead of attention, excite
laughter. I was both surprised and vexed to find the enchantment
dissolved, which I wished might continue to the end of the book; and
several of its readers have confessed the same disappointment to me: The
beauties are so numerous, that we cannot bear the defects, but want it
to be perfect in all respects.

In the course of my observations upon this singular book, it seemed to
me that it was possible to compose a work upon the same plan, wherein
these defects might be avoided; and the keeping, as in painting, might
be preserved.

But then I began to fear it might happen to me as to certain
translators, and imitators of Shakespeare; the unities may be preserved,
while the spirit is evaporated. However, I ventured to attempt it; I
read the beginning to a circle of friends of approved judgment, and by
their approbation was encouraged to proceed, and to finish it.





THE OLD ENGLISH BARON: A GOTHIC STORY.


In the minority of Henry the Sixth, King of England, when the renowned
John, Duke of Bedford was Regent of France, and Humphrey, the good Duke
of Gloucester, was Protector of England, a worthy knight, called
Sir Philip Harclay, returned from his travels to England, his native
country. He had served under the glorious King Henry the Fifth with
distinguished valour, had acquired an honourable fame, and was no less
esteemed for Christian virtues than for deeds of chivalry. After the
death of his prince, he entered into the service of the Greek emperor,
and distinguished his courage against the encroachments of the Saracens.
In a battle there, he took prisoner a certain gentleman, by name M.
Zadisky, of Greek extraction, but brought up by a Saracen officer; this
man he converted to the Christian faith; after which he bound him to
himself by the ties of friendship and gratitude, and he resolved to
continue with his benefactor. After thirty years travel and warlike
service, he determined to return to his native land, and to spend the
remainder of his life in peace; and, by devoting himself to works of
piety and charity, prepare for a better state hereafter.

This noble knight had, in his early youth, contracted a strict
friendship with the only son of the Lord Lovel, a gentleman of eminent
virtues and accomplishments. During Sir Philip’s residence in foreign
countries, he had frequently written to his friend, and had for a time
received answers; the last informed him of the death of old Lord Lovel,
and the marriage of the young one; but from that time he had heard no
more from him. Sir Philip imputed it not to neglect or forgetfulness,
but to the difficulties of intercourse, common at that time to all
travellers and adventurers. When he was returning home, he resolved,
after looking into his family affairs, to visit the Castle of Lovel, and
enquire into the situation of his friend. He landed in Kent, attended by
his Greek friend and two faithful servants, one of which was maimed by
the wounds he had received in the defence of his master.

Sir Philip went to his family seat in Yorkshire. He found his mother
and sister were dead, and his estates sequestered in the hands of
commissioners appointed by the Protector. He was obliged to prove the
reality of his claim, and the identity of his person (by the testimony
of some of the old servants of his family), after which every thing was
restored to him. He took possession of his own house, established his
household, settled the old servants in their former stations, and placed
those he brought home in the upper offices of his family. He then left
his friend to superintend his domestic affairs; and, attended by only
one of his old servants, he set out for the Castle of Lovel, in the west
of England. They travelled by easy journeys; but, towards the evening
of the second day, the servant was so ill and fatigued he could go no
further; he stopped at an inn where he grew worse every hour, and the
next day expired. Sir Philip was under great concern for the loss of his
servant, and some for himself, being alone in a strange place; however
he took courage, ordered his servant’s funeral, attended it himself,
and, having shed a tear of humanity over his grave, proceeded alone on
his journey.

As he drew near the estate of his friend, he began to enquire of every
one he met, whether the Lord Lovel resided at the seat of his ancestors?
He was answered by one, he did not know; by another, he could not tell;
by a third, that he never heard of such a person. Sir Philip thought it
strange that a man of Lord Lovel’s consequence should be unknown in
his own neighbourhood, and where his ancestors had usually resided. He
ruminated on the uncertainty of human happiness. “This world,” said
he, “has nothing for a wise man to depend upon. I have lost all my
relations, and most of my friends; and am even uncertain whether any
are remaining. I will, however, be thankful for the blessings that are
spared to me; and I will endeavour to replace those that I have lost. If
my friend lives, he shall share my fortune with me; his children shall
have the reversion of it; and I will share his comforts in return.
But perhaps my friend may have met with troubles that have made him
disgusted with the world; perhaps he has buried his amiable wife, or
his promising children; and, tired of public life, he is retired into a
monastery. At least, I will know what all this silence means.”

When he came within a mile of the Castle of Lovel, he stopped at a
cottage and asked for a draught of water; a peasant, master of the
house, brought it, and asked if his honour would alight and take a
moment’s refreshment. Sir Philip accepted his offer, being resolved to
make farther enquiry before he approached the castle. He asked the same
questions of him, that he had before of others.

“Which Lord Lovel,” said the man, “does your honour enquire after?”

“The man whom I knew was called Arthur,” said Sir Philip.

“Ay,” said the Peasant, “he was the only surviving son of Richard, Lord
Lovel, as I think?”

“Very true, friend, he was so.”

“Alas, sir,” said the man, “he is dead! he survived his father but a
short time.”

“Dead! say you? how long since?”

“About fifteen years, to the best of my remembrance.”

Sir Philip sighed deeply.

“Alas!” said he, “what do we, by living long, but survive all our
friends! But pray tell me how he died?”

“I will, sir, to the best of my knowledge. An’t please your honour,
I heard say, that he attended the King when he went against the Welch
rebels, and he left his lady big with child; and so there was a battle
fought, and the king got the better of the rebels. There came first a
report that none of the officers were killed; but a few days after
there came a messenger with an account very different, that several were
wounded, and that the Lord Lovel was slain; which sad news overset us
all with sorrow, for he was a noble gentleman, a bountiful master, and
the delight of all the neighbourhood.”

“He was indeed,” said Sir Philip, “all that is amiable and good; he was
my dear and noble friend, and I am inconsolable for his loss. But the
unfortunate lady, what became of her?”

“Why, a’nt please your honour, they said she died of grief for the loss
of her husband; but her death was kept private for a time, and we did
not know it for certain till some weeks afterwards.”

“The will of Heaven be obeyed!” said Sir Philip; “but who succeeded to
the title and estate?”

“The next heir,” said the peasant, “a kinsman of the deceased, Sir
Walter Lovel by name.”

“I have seen him,” said Sir Philip, “formerly; but where was he when
these events happened?”

“At the Castle of Lovel, sir; he came there on a visit to the lady, and
waited there to receive my Lord, at his return from Wales; when the news
of his death arrived, Sir Walter did every thing in his power to comfort
her, and some said he was to marry her; but she refused to be comforted,
and took it so to heart that she died.”

“And does the present Lord Lovel reside at the castle?”

“No, sir.”

“Who then?”

“The Lord Baron Fitz-Owen.”

“And how came Sir Walter to leave the seat of his ancestors?”

“Why, sir, he married his sister to this said Lord; and so he sold the
Castle to him, and went away, and built himself a house in the north
country, as far as Northumberland, I think they call it.”

“That is very strange!” said Sir Philip.

“So it is, please your honour; but this is all I know about it.”

“I thank you, friend, for your intelligence; I have taken a long journey
to no purpose, and have met with nothing but cross accidents. This life
is, indeed, a pilgrimage! Pray direct me the nearest way to the next
monastery.”

“Noble sir,” said the peasant, “it is full five miles off, the night
is coming on, and the ways are bad; I am but a poor man, and cannot
entertain your honour as you are used to; but if you will enter my poor
cottage, that, and every thing in it, are at your service.”

“My honest friend, I thank you heartily,” said Sir Philip; “your
kindness and hospitality might shame many of higher birth and breeding;
I will accept your kind offer;--but pray let me know the name of my
host?”

“John Wyatt, sir; an honest man though a poor one, and a Christian man,
though a sinful one.”

“Whose cottage is this?”

“It belongs to the Lord Fitz-Owen.”

“What family have you?”

“A wife, two sons and a daughter, who will all be proud to wait upon
your honour; let me hold your honour’s stirrup whilst you alight.”

He seconded these words by the proper action, and having assisted his
guest to dismount, he conducted him into his house, called his wife to
attend him, and then led his horse under a poor shed, that served him
as a stable. Sir Philip was fatigued in body and mind, and was glad to
repose himself anywhere. The courtesy of his host engaged his attention,
and satisfied his wishes. He soon after returned, followed by a youth of
about eighteen years.

“Make haste, John,” said the father, “and be sure you say neither more
nor less than what I have told you.”

“I will, father,” said the lad; and immediately set off, ran like a buck
across the fields, and was out of sight in an instant.

“I hope, friend,” said Sir Philip, “you have not sent your son to
provide for my entertainment; I am a soldier, used to lodge and fare
hard; and, if it were otherwise, your courtesy and kindness would give a
relish to the most ordinary food.”

“I wish heartily,” said Wyatt, “it was in my power to entertain your
honour as you ought to be; but, as I cannot do so, I will, when my son
returns, acquaint you with the errand I sent him on.”

After this they conversed together on common subjects, like
fellow-creatures of the same natural form and endowments, though
different kinds of education had given a conscious superiority to the
one, a conscious inferiority to the other; and the due respect was paid
by the latter, without being exacted by the former. In about half an
hour young John returned.

“Thou hast made haste,” said the father.

“Not more than good speed,” quoth the son.

“Tell us, then, how you speed?”

“Shall I tell all that passed?” said John.

“All,” said the father; “I don’t want to hide any thing.”

 John stood with his cap in his hand, and thus told his tale--

“I went straight to the castle as fast as I could run; it was my hap to
light on young Master Edmund first, so I told him just as you had me,
that a noble gentleman was come a long journey from foreign parts to see
the Lord Lovel, his friend; and, having lived abroad many years, he did
not know that he was dead, and that the castle was fallen into
other hands; that upon hearing these tidings he was much grieved and
disappointed, and wanting a night’s lodging, to rest himself before
he returned to his own home, he was fain to take up with one at our
cottage; that my father thought my Lord would be angry with him, if he
were not told of the stranger’s journey and intentions, especially to
let such a man lie at our cottage, where he could neither be lodged nor
entertained according to his quality.”

Here John stopped, and his father exclaimed--

“A good lad! you did your errand very well; and tell us the answer.”

John proceeded--

“Master Edmund ordered me some beer, and went to acquaint my Lord of the
message; he stayed a while, and then came back to me.--‘John,’ said he,
‘tell the noble stranger that the Baron Fitz-Owen greets him well, and
desires him to rest assured, that though Lord Lovel is dead, and the
castle fallen into other hands, his friends will always find a welcome
there; and my lord desires that he will accept of a lodging there, while
he remains in this country.’--So I came away directly, and made haste to
deliver my errand.”

Sir Philip expressed some dissatisfaction at this mark of old Wyatt’s
respect.

“I wish,” said he, “that you had acquainted me with your intention
before you sent to inform the Baron I was here. I choose rather to lodge
with you; and I propose to make amends for the trouble I shall give
you.”

“Pray, sir, don’t mention it,” said the peasant, “you are as welcome as
myself; I hope no offence; the only reason of my sending was, because I
am both unable and unworthy to entertain your honour.”

“I am sorry,” said Sir Philip, “you should think me so dainty; I am
a Christian soldier; and him I acknowledge for my Prince and Master,
accepted the invitations of the poor, and washed the feet of his
disciples. Let us say no more on this head; I am resolved to stay this
night in your cottage, tomorrow I will wait on the Baron, and thank him
for his hospitable invitation.”

“That shall be as your honour pleases, since you will condescend to stay
here. John, do you run back and acquaint my Lord of it.”

“Not so,” said Sir Philip; “it is now almost dark.”

“‘Tis no matter,” said John, “I can go it blindfold.”

Sir Philip then gave him a message to the Baron in his own name,
acquainting him that he would pay his respects to him in the morning.
John flew back the second time, and soon returned with new commendations
from the Baron, and that he would expect him on the morrow. Sir Philip
gave him an angel of gold, and praised his speed and abilities.

He supped with Wyatt and his family upon new-laid eggs and rashers of
bacon, with the highest relish. They praised the Creator for His gifts,
and acknowledged they were unworthy of the least of His blessings.
They gave the best of their two lofts up to Sir Philip, the rest of the
family slept in the other, the old woman and her daughter in the bed,
the father and his two sons upon clean straw. Sir Philip’s bed was of
a better kind, and yet much inferior to his usual accommodations;
nevertheless the good knight slept as well in Wyatt’s cottage, as he
could have done in a palace.

During his sleep, many strange and incoherent dreams arose to his
imagination. He thought he received a message from his friend Lord
Lovel, to come to him at the castle; that he stood at the gate and
received him, that he strove to embrace him, but could not; but that he
spoke to this effect:--“Though I have been dead these fifteen years,
I still command here, and none can enter these gates without my
permission; know that it is I that invite, and bid you welcome; the
hopes of my house rest upon you.” Upon this he bid Sir Philip follow
him; he led him through many rooms, till at last he sunk down, and
Sir Philip thought he still followed him, till he came into a dark
and frightful cave, where he disappeared, and in his stead he beheld
a complete suit of armour stained with blood, which belonged to his
friend, and he thought he heard dismal groans from beneath. Presently
after, he thought he was hurried away by an invisible hand, and led into
a wild heath, where the people were inclosing the ground, and making
preparations for two combatants; the trumpet sounded, and a voice called
out still louder, “Forbear! It is not permitted to be revealed till
the time is ripe for the event; wait with patience on the decrees of
heaven.” He was then transported to his own house, where, going into an
unfrequented room, he was again met by his friend, who was living, and
in all the bloom of youth, as when he first knew him: He started at the
sight, and awoke. The sun shone upon his curtains, and, perceiving
it was day, he sat up, and recollected where he was. The images that
impressed his sleeping fancy remained strongly on his mind waking; but
his reason strove to disperse them; it was natural that the story he
had heard should create these ideas, that they should wait on him in his
sleep, and that every dream should bear some relation to his deceased
friend. The sun dazzled his eyes, the birds serenaded him and diverted
his attention, and a woodbine forced its way through the window, and
regaled his sense of smelling with its fragrance. He arose, paid his
devotions to Heaven, and then carefully descended the narrow stairs, and
went out at the door of the cottage. There he saw the industrious wife
and daughter of old Wyatt at their morning work, the one milking her
cow, the other feeding her poultry. He asked for a draught of milk,
which, with a slice of rye bread, served to break his fast. He walked
about the fields alone; for old Wyatt and his two sons were gone out to
their daily labour. He was soon called back by the good woman, who told
him that a servant from the Baron waited to conduct him to the Castle.
He took leave of Wyatt’s wife, telling her he would see her again before
he left the country. The daughter fetched his horse, which he mounted,
and set forward with the servant, of whom he asked many questions
concerning his master’s family.

“How long have you lived with the Baron?”

“Ten years.”

“Is he a good master?”

“Yes, Sir, and also a good husband and father.”

“What family has he?”

“Three sons and a daughter.”

“What age are they of?”

“The eldest son is in his seventeenth year, the second in his sixteenth,
the others several years younger; but beside these my Lord has several
young gentlemen brought up with his own sons, two of which are his
nephews; he keeps in his house a learned clerk to teach them languages;
and as for all bodily exercises, none come near them; there is a
fletcher to teach them the use of the cross-bow; a master to teach them
to ride; another the use of the sword; another learns them to dance; and
then they wrestle and run, and have such activity in all their motions,
that it does one good to see them; and my Lord thinks nothing too much
to bestow on their education.”

“Truly,” says Sir Philip, “he does the part of a good parent, and I
honour him greatly for it; but are the young gentlemen of a promising
disposition?”

“Yes indeed, Sir,” answered the servant; “the young gentlemen, my Lord’s
sons, are hopeful youths; but yet there is one who is thought to exceed
them all, though he is the son of a poor labourer.”

“And who is he?” said the knight.

“One Edmund Twyford, the son of a cottager in our village; he is to
be sure as fine a youth as ever the sun shone upon, and of so sweet a
disposition that nobody envies his good fortune.”

“What good fortune does he enjoy?”

“Why, Sir, about two years ago, my lord, at his sons request, took
him into his own family, and gives him the same education as his own
children; the young lords doat upon him, especially Master William, who
is about his own age: It is supposed that he will attend the young Lords
when they go to the wars, which my Lord intends they shall by and by.”

“What you tell me,” said Sir Philip, “increases every minute my respect
for your Lord; he is an excellent father and master, he seeks out merit
in obscurity; he distinguishes and rewards it,--I honour him with all my
heart.”

In this manner they conversed together till they came within view of
the castle. In a field near the house they saw a company of youths, with
crossbows in their hands, shooting at a mark.

“There,” said the servant, “are our young gentlemen at their exercises.”

Sir Philip stopped his horse to observe them; he heard two or three of
them cry out, “Edmund is the victor! He wins the prize!”

“I must,” said Sir Philip, “take a view of this Edmund.”

He jumped off his horse, gave the bridle to the servant, and walked into
the field. The young gentlemen came up, and paid their respects to him;
he apologized for intruding upon their sports, and asked which was
the victor? Upon which the youth he spoke to beckoned to another, who
immediately advanced, and made his obeisance; As he drew near, Sir
Philip fixed his eyes upon him, with so much attention, that he seemed
not to observe his courtesy and address. At length he recollected
himself, and said, “What is your name, young man?”

“Edmund Twyford,” replied the youth; “and I have the honour to attend
upon the Lord Fitz-Owen’s sons.”

“Pray, noble sir,” said the youth who first addressed Sir Philip, “are
not you the stranger who is expected by my father?”

“I am, sir,” answered he, “and I go to pay my respects to him.”

“Will you excuse our attendance, Sir? We have not yet finished our
exercises.”

“My dear youth,” said Sir Philip, “no apology is necessary; but will you
favour me with your proper name, that I may know to whose courtesy I am
obliged?”

“My name is William Fitz-Owen; that gentleman is my eldest brother,
Master Robert; that other my kinsman, Master Richard Wenlock.”

“Very well; I thank you, gentle Sir; I beg you not to stir another step,
your servant holds my horse.”

“Farewell, Sir,” said Master William; “I hope we shall have the pleasure
of meeting you at dinner.”

The youths returned to their sports, and Sir Philip mounted his horse
and proceeded to the castle; he entered it with a deep sigh, and
melancholy recollections. The Baron received him with the utmost respect
and courtesy. He gave a brief account of the principal events that had
happened in the family of Lovel during his absence; he spoke of the late
Lord Lovel with respect, of the present with the affection of a brother.
Sir Philip, in return, gave a brief recital of his own adventures
abroad, and of the disagreeable circumstances he had met with since his
return home; he pathetically lamented the loss of all his friends, not
forgetting that of his faithful servant on the way; saying he could be
contented to give up the world, and retire to a religious house, but
that he was withheld by the consideration, that some who depended
entirely upon him, would want his presence and assistance; and, beside
that, he thought he might be of service to many others. The Baron agreed
with him in opinion, that a man was of much more service to the world
who continued in it, than one who retired from it, and gave his fortune
to the Church, whose servants did not always make the best use of it.
Sir Philip then turned the conversation, and congratulated the Baron
on his hopeful family; he praised their persons and address, and warmly
applauded the care he bestowed on their education. The Baron listened
with pleasure to the honest approbation of a worthy heart, and enjoyed
the true happiness of a parent.

Sir Philip then made further enquiry concerning Edmund, whose appearance
had struck him with an impression in his favour.

“That boy,” said the Baron, “is the son of a cottager in this
neighbourhood; his uncommon merit, and gentleness of manners,
distinguish him from those of his own class; from his childhood he
attracted the notice and affection of all that knew him; he was beloved
everywhere but at his father’s house, and there it should seem that his
merits were his crimes; for the peasant, his father, hated him, treated
him severely, and at length threatened to turn him out of doors; he
used to run here and there on errands for my people, and at length they
obliged me to take notice of him; my sons earnestly desired I would take
him into my family; I did so about two years ago, intending to make him
their servant; but his extraordinary genius and disposition have obliged
me to look upon him in a superior light; perhaps I may incur the censure
of many people, by giving him so many advantages, and treating him
as the companion of my children; his merit must justify or condemn my
partiality for him; however, I trust that I have secured to my children
a faithful servant of the upper kind, and a useful friend to my family.”

Sir Philip warmly applauded his generous host, and wished to be a sharer
in his bounty to that fine youth, whose appearance indicated all the
qualities that had endeared him to his companions.

At the hour of dinner the young men presented themselves before their
Lord, and his guest. Sir Philip addressed himself to Edmund; he asked
him many questions, and received modest and intelligent answers, and
he grew every minute more pleased with him. After dinner the youths
withdrew with their tutor to pursue their studies. Sir Philip sat for
some time wrapt up in meditation. After some minutes, the Baron
asked him, “If he might not be favoured with the fruits of his
contemplations?”

“You shall, my Lord,” answered he, “for you have a right to them. I was
thinking, that when many blessings are lost, we should cherish those
that remain, and even endeavour to replace the others. My Lord, I have
taken a strong liking to that youth whom you call Edmund Twyford; I
have neither children nor relations to claim my fortune, nor share my
affections; your Lordship has many demands upon your generosity: I can
provide for this promising youth without doing injustice to any one;
will you give him to me?”

“He is a fortunate boy,” said the Baron, “to gain your favour so soon.”

“My Lord,” said the knight, “I will confess to you, that the first thing
that touched my heart in his favour, is a strong resemblance he bears to
a certain dear friend I once had, and his manner resembles him as much
as his person; his qualities deserve that he should be placed in a
higher rank; I will adopt him for my son, and introduce him into the
world as my relation, if you will resign him to me; What say you?”

“Sir,” said the Baron, “you have made a noble offer, and I am too much
the young man’s friend to be a hindrance to his preferment. It is true
that I intended to provide for him in my own family; but I cannot do it
so effectually as by giving him to you, whose generous affection being
unlimited by other ties, may in time prefer him to a higher station as
he shall deserve it. I have only one condition to make; that the lad
shall have his option; for I would not oblige him to leave my service
against his inclination.”

“You say well,” replied Sir Philip; “nor would I take him upon other
terms.”

“Agreed then,” said the Baron; “let us send for Edmund hither.”

A servant was sent to fetch him; he came immediately, and his Lord
thus bespoke him.

“Edmund, you owe eternal obligations to this gentleman, who, perceiving
in you a certain resemblance to a friend of his, and liking your
behaviour, has taken a great affection for you, insomuch that he desires
to receive you into his family: I cannot better provide for you than by
disposing of you to him; and, if you have no objection, you shall return
home with him when he goes from hence.”

The countenance of Edmund underwent many alterations during this
proposal of his Lord; it expressed tenderness, gratitude, and sorrow,
but the last was predominant; he bowed respectfully to the Baron and Sir
Philip, and, after some hesitation, spoke as follows:--

“I feel very strongly the obligations I owe to this gentleman, for
his noble and generous offer; I cannot express the sense I have of his
goodness to me, a peasant 