boy, only known to him by my Lord’s kind and
partial mention; this uncommon bounty claims my eternal gratitude. To
you, my honoured Lord, I owe every thing, even this gentleman’s good
opinion; you distinguished me when nobody else did; and, next to you,
your sons are my best and dearest benefactors; they introduced me to
your notice. My heart is unalterably attached to this house and family,
and my utmost ambition is to spend my life in your service; but if you
have perceived any great and grievous faults in me, that make you wish
to put me out of your family, and if you have recommended me to this
gentleman in order to be rid of me, in that case I will submit to your
pleasure, as I would if you should sentence me to death.”

During this speech the tears made themselves channels down Edmund’s
cheeks; and his two noble auditors, catching the tender inflection, wiped
their eyes at the conclusion.

“My dear child,” said the Baron, “you overcome me by your tenderness and
gratitude! I know of no faults you have committed, that I should wish to
be rid of you. I thought to do you the best service by promoting you to
that of Sir Philip Harclay, who is both able and willing to provide for
you; but if you prefer my service to his, I will not part with you.”

Upon this Edmund kneeled to the Baron; he embraced his knees. “My dear
Lord! I am, and will be your servant, in preference to any man living; I
only ask your permission to live and die in your service.”


“You see, Sir Philip,” said the Baron, “how this boy engages the heart;
how can I part with him?”

“I cannot ask you any more,” answered Sir Philip, “I see it is
impossible; but I esteem you both still higher than ever; the youth
for his gratitude, and your lordship for your noble mind and true
generosity; blessings attend you both!”

“Oh, sir,” said Edmund, pressing the hand of Sir Philip, “do not think
me ungrateful to you; I will ever remember your goodness, and pray to
Heaven to reward it: the name of Sir Philip Harclay shall be engraven
upon my heart, next to my Lord and his family, for ever.”

Sir Philip raised the youth and embraced him, saying, “If ever you want
a friend, remember me; and depend upon my protection, so long as you
continue to deserve it.”

Edmund bowed low, and withdrew, with his eyes full of tears of
sensibility and gratitude. When he was gone, Sir Philip said, “I am
thinking, that though young Edmund wants not my assistance at present,
he may hereafter stand in need of my friendship. I should not wonder
if such rare qualities as he possesses, should one day create envy,
and raise him enemies; in which case he might come to lose your favour,
without any fault of yours or his own.”

“I am obliged to you for the warning,” said the Baron, “I hope it will
be unnecessary; but if ever I part with Edmund, you shall have the
refusal of him.”

“I thank your Lordship for all your civilities to me,” said the knight;
“I leave my best wishes with you and your hopeful family, and I humbly
take my leave.”

“Will you not stay one night in the castle?” returned my Lord; “you
shall be as welcome a guest as ever.”

“I acknowledge your goodness and hospitality, but this house fills me
with melancholy recollections; I came hither with a heavy heart, and it
will not be lighter while I remain here. I shall always remember your
lordship with the highest respect and esteem; and I pray God to preserve
you, and increase your blessings!”

After some further ceremonies, Sir Philip departed, and returned to old
Wyatt’s, ruminating on the vicissitude of human affairs, and thinking on
the changes he had seen.

At his return to Wyatt’s cottage, he found the family assembled
together. He told them he would take another night’s lodging there,
which they heard with great pleasure;--for he had familiarised himself
to them in the last evening’s conversation, insomuch that they began to
enjoy his company. He told Wyatt of the misfortune he had sustained by
losing his servant on the way, and wished he could get one to attend
him home in his place. Young John looked earnestly at his father, who
returned a look of approbation.

“I perceive one in this company,” said he, “that would be proud to serve
your honour; but I fear he is not brought up well enough.”

John coloured with impatience; he could not forbear speaking.

“Sir, I can answer for an honest heart, a willing mind, and a light pair
of heels; and though I am somewhat awkward, I shall be proud to learn,
to please my noble master, if he will but try me.”

“You say well,” said Sir Philip, “I have observed your qualifications,
and if you are desirous to serve me, I am equally pleased with you; if
your father has no objection I will take you.”

“Objection, sir!” said the old man; “it will be my pride to prefer him
to such a noble gentleman; I will make no terms for him, but leave it to
your honour to do for him as he shall deserve.”

“Very well,” said Sir Philip, “you shall be no loser by that; I will
charge myself with the care of the young man.”

The bargain was struck, and Sir Philip purchased a horse for John of
the old man. The next morning they set out; the knight left marks of his
bounty with the good couple, and departed, laden with their blessing and
prayers. He stopped at the place where his faithful servant was buried,
and caused masses to be said for the repose of his soul; then, pursuing
his way by easy journeys, arrived in safety at home. His family rejoiced
at his return; he settled his new servant in attendance upon his person;
he then looked round his neighbourhood for objects of his charity; when
he saw merit in distress, it was his delight to raise and support it; he
spent his time in the service of his Creator, and glorified him in doing
good to his creatures. He reflected frequently upon every thing that had
befallen him in his late journey to the west; and, at his leisure, took
down all the particulars in writing.

*****

[Here follows an interval of four years, as by the manuscript; and this
omission seems intended by the writer. What follows is in a different
hand, and the character is more modern.]

*****


ABOUT this time the prognostics of Sir Philip Harclay began to be
verified, that Edmund’s good qualities might one day excite envy and
create him enemies. The sons and kinsmen of his patron began to seek
occasion to find fault with him, and to depreciate him with others. The
Baron’s eldest son and heir, Master Robert, had several contests with
Master William, the second son, upon his account: This youth had a warm
affection for Edmund, and whenever his brother and kinsmen treated him
slightly, he supported him against their malicious insinuations. Mr.
Richard Wenlock, and Mr. John Markham, were the sisters sons of the Lord
Fitz-Owen; and there were several other more distant relations, who,
with them, secretly envied Edmund’s fine qualities, and strove to lessen
him in the esteem of the Baron and his family. By degrees they excited
a dislike in Master Robert, that in time was fixed into habit, and fell
little short of aversion.


Young Wenlock’s hatred was confirmed by an additional circumstance: He
had a growing passion for the Lady Emma, the Baron’s only daughter;
and, as love is eagle-eyed, he saw, or fancied he saw her cast an eye of
preference on Edmund. An accidental service that she received from
him, had excited her grateful regards and attentions towards him. The
incessant view of his fine person and qualities, had perhaps improved
her esteem into a still softer sensation, though she was yet ignorant of
it, and thought it only the tribute due to gratitude and friendship.


One Christmas time, the Baron and all his family went to visit a family
in Wales; crossing a ford, the horse that carried the Lady Emma, who
rode behind her cousin Wenlock, stumbled and fell down, and threw her
off into the water: Edmund dismounted in a moment, and flew to her
assistance; he took her out so quick, that the accident was not known
to some part of the company. From this time Wenlock strove to undermine
Edmund in her esteem, and she conceived herself obliged in justice
and gratitude to defend him against the malicious insinuations of
his enemies. She one day asked Wenlock, why he in particular should
endeavour to recommend himself to her favour, by speaking against
Edmund, to whom she was under great obligations? He made but little
reply; but the impression sunk deep into his rancorous heart; every word
in Edmund’s behalf was like a poisoned arrow that rankled in the
wound, and grew every day more inflamed. Sometimes he would pretend to
extenuate Edmund’s supposed faults, in order to load him with the sin
of ingratitude upon other occasions. Rancour works deepest in the heart
that strives to conceal it; and, when covered by art, frequently puts on
the appearance of candour. By these means did Wenlock and Markham impose
upon the credulity of Master Robert and their other relations: Master
William only stood proof against all their insinuations.


The same autumn that Edmund completed his eighteenth year, the Baron
declared his intention of sending the young men of his house to France
the following spring, to learn the art of war, and signalize their
courage and abilities.

Their ill-will towards Edmund was so well concealed, that his patron
had not discovered it; but it was whispered among the servants, who are
generally close observers of the manners of their principals. Edmund
was a favourite with them all, which was a strong presumption that he
deserved to be so, for they seldom shew much regard to dependents, or
to superiour domestics, who are generally objects of envy and dislike.
Edmund was courteous, but not familiar with them; and, by this means,
gained their affections without soliciting them. Among them was an old
serving man, called Joseph Howel; this man had formerly served the old
Lord Lovel, and his son; and when the young Lord died, and Sir Walter
sold the castle to his brother-in-law, the Lord Fitz-Owen, he only of
all the old servants was left in the house, to take care of it, and to
deliver it into the possession of the new proprietor, who retained him
in his service: He was a man of few words, but much reflection: and,
without troubling himself about other people’s affairs, went silently
and properly about his own business; more solicitous to discharge his
duty, than to recommend himself to notice, and not seeming to aspire to
any higher office than that of a serving man. This old man would fix his
eyes upon Edmund, whenever he could do it without observation; sometimes
he would sigh deeply, and a tear would start from his eye, which he
strove to conceal from observation. One day Edmund surprised him in this
tender emotion, as he was wiping his eyes with the back of his hand:
“Why,” said he, “my good friend, do you look at me so earnestly and
affectionately?”

“Because I love you, Master Edmund,” said he; “because I wish you well.”

“I thank you kindly,” answered Edmund; “I am unable to repay your love,
otherwise than by returning it, which I do sincerely.”

“I thank you, sir,” said the old man; “that is all I desire, and more
than I deserve.”

“Do not say so,” said Edmund; “if I had any better way to thank you, I
would not say so much about it; but words are all my inheritance.”

Upon this he shook hands with Joseph, who withdrew hastily to conceal
his emotion, saying, “God bless you, master, and make your fortune
equal to your deserts! I cannot help thinking you were born to a higher
station than what you now hold.”

“You know to the contrary,” said Edmund; but Joseph was gone out of
sight and hearing.

The notice and observation of strangers, and the affection of
individuals, together with that inward consciousness that always attends
superiour qualities, would sometimes kindle the flames of ambition in
Edmund’s heart; but he checked them presently by reflecting upon his
low birth and dependant station. He was modest, yet intrepid; gentle and
courteous to all; frank and unreserved to those that loved him, discreet
and complaisant to those who hated him; generous and compassionate
to the distresses of his fellow-creatures in general; humble, but not
servile, to his patron and superiors. Once, when he with a manly spirit
justified himself against a malicious imputation, his young Lord,
Robert, taxed him with pride and arrogance to his kinsmen. Edmund denied
the charge against him with equal spirit and modesty. Master Robert
answered him sharply, “How dare you contradict my cousins? do you mean
to give them the lie?”

“Not in words, Sir,” said Edmund; “but I will behave so as that you
shall not believe them.”

Master Robert haughtily bid him be silent and know himself, and not
presume to contend with men so much his superiors in every respect.
These heart-burnings in some degree subsided by their preparations for
going to France. Master Robert was to be presented at court before his
departure, and it was expected that he should be knighted. The Baron
designed Edmund to be his esquire; but this was frustrated by his
old enemies, who persuaded Robert to make choice of one of his own
domestics, called Thomas Hewson; him did they set up as a rival to
Edmund, and he took every occasion to affront him. All that Master
Robert gained by this step was the contempt of those, who saw Edmund’s
merit, and thought it want of discernment in him not to distinguish
and reward it. Edmund requested of his Lord that he might be Master
William’s attendant; “and when,” said he, “my patron shall be knighted,
as I make no doubt he will one day be, he has promised that I shall be
his esquire.” The Baron granted Edmund’s request; and, being freed from
servitude to the rest, he was devoted to that of his beloved Master
William, who treated him in public as his principal domestic, but in
private as his chosen friend and brother.


The whole cabal of his enemies consulted together in what manner they
should vent their resentment against him; and it was agreed that they
should treat him with indifference and neglect, till they should arrive
in France; and when there, they should contrive to render his courage
suspected, and by putting him upon some desperate enterprize, rid
themselves of him for ever. About this time died the great Duke of
Bedford, to the irreparable loss of the English nation. He was succeeded
by Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, as Regent of France, of which
great part had revolted to Charles the Dauphin. Frequent actions ensued.
Cities were lost and won; and continual occasions offered to exercise
the courage, and abilities, of the youths of both nations.

The young men of Baron Fitz-Owen’s house were recommended particularly
to the Regent’s notice. Master Robert was knighted, with several other
young men of family, who distinguished themselves by their spirit and
activity upon every occasion. The youth were daily employed in warlike
exercises, and frequent actions; and made their first essay in arms in
such a manner as to bring into notice all that deserved it. Various a
 but all their contrivances recoiled upon themselves, and brought
increase of honour upon Edmund’s head; he distinguished himself upon
so many occasions, that Sir Robert himself began to pay him more than
ordinary regard, to the infinite mortification of his kinsmen and
relations. They laid many schemes against him, but none took effect.

[From this place the characters in the manuscript are effaced by time
and damp. Here and there some sentences are legible, but not sufficient
to pursue the thread of the story. Mention is made of several actions in
which the young men were engaged--that Edmund distinguished himself
by intrepidity in action; by gentleness, humanity and modesty in the
cessations--that he attracted the notice of every person of observation,
and also that he received personal commendation from the Regent.]

*****

[The following incidents are clear enough to be transcribed; but the
beginning of the next succeeding pages is obliterated. However, we may
guess at the beginning by what remains.]

*****

As soon as the cabal met in Sir Robert’s tent, Mr. Wenlock thus
began:--“You see, my friends, that every attempt we make to humble this
upstart, turns into applause, and serves only to raise his pride still
higher. Something must be done, or his praise will go home before us,
at our own expence; and we shall seem only soils to set off his glories.
Any thing would I give to the man who should execute our vengeance upon
him.”

“Stop there, cousin Wenlock,” said Sir Robert; “though I think Edmund
proud and vain-glorious, and would join in any scheme to humble him,
and make him know himself, I will not suffer any man to use such base
methods to effect it. Edmund is brave; and it is beneath an Englishman
to revenge himself by unworthy means; if any such are used, I will be
the first man to bring the guilty to justice; and if I hear another word
to this purpose, I will inform my brother William, who will acquaint
Edmund with your mean intentions.” Upon this the cabal drew back, and
Mr. Wenlock protested that he meant no more than to mortify his pride,
and make him know his proper station. Soon after Sir Robert withdrew,
and they resumed their deliberations.


Then spoke Thomas Hewson: “There is a party to be sent out to-morrow
night, to intercept a convoy of provisions for the relief of Rouen;
I will provoke Mr. Edmund to make one of this party, and when he is
engaged in the action, I and my companions will draw off, and leave him
to the enemy, who I trust will so handle him, that you shall no more be
troubled with him.”

“This will do,” said Mr. Wenlock; “but let it be kept from my two
cousins, and only known to ourselves; if they offer to be of the party,
I will persuade them off it. And you, Thomas, if you bring this scheme
to a conclusion, may depend upon my eternal gratitude.”

“And mine,” said Markham; and so said all. The next day the affair was
publicly mentioned; and Hewson, as he promised, provoked Edmund to the
trial. Several young men of family offered themselves; among the rest,
Sir Robert, and his brother William. Mr. Wenlock persuaded them not to
go, and set the danger of the enterprize in the strongest colours. At
last Sir Robert complained of the tooth-ache, and was confined to his
tent. Edmund waited on him; and judging by the ardour of his own courage
of that of his patron, thus bespoke him:--“I am greatly concerned, dear
Sir, that we cannot have your company at night; but as I know what you
will suffer in being absent, I would beg the favour of you to let me use
your arms and device, and I will promise not to disgrace them.”

“No, Edmund, I cannot consent to that: I thank you for your noble offer,
and will remember it to your advantage; but I cannot wear honours of
another man’s getting. You have awakened me to a sense of my duty: I
will go with you, and contend with you for glory; and William shall do
the same.”


In a few hours they were ready to set out. Wenlock and Markham, and
their dependants, found themselves engaged in honour to go upon an
enterprize they never intended; and set out, with heavy hearts, to join
the party. They marched in silence in the horrors of a dark night,
and wet roads; they met the convoy where they expected, and a sharp
engagement ensued. The victory was some time doubtful; but the moon
rising on the backs of the English, gave them the advantage. They saw
the disposition of their enemies, and availed themselves of it. Edmund
advanced the foremost of the party; he drew out the leader on the French
side; he slew him. Mr. William pressed forward to assist his friend; Sir
Robert, to defend his brother; Wenlock, and Markham, from shame to stay
behind.


Thomas Hewson and his associates drew back on their side; the French
perceived it, and pursued the advantage. Edmund pushed them in front;
the young nobles all followed him; they broke through the detachment,
and stopped the waggons. The officer who commanded the party, encouraged
them to go on; the defeat was soon complete, and the provisions carried
in triumph to the English camp.

Edmund was presented to the Regent as the man to whom the victory was
chiefly owing. Not a tongue presumed to move itself against him; even
malice and envy were silenced.

“Approach, young man,” said the Regent, “that I may confer upon you the
honour of knighthood, which you have well deserved.”

 Mr. Wenlock could no longer forbear speaking--“Knighthood,” said he,
“is an order belonging to gentlemen, it cannot be conferred on a
peasant.”

“What say you, sir!” returned the Regent; “is this youth a peasant?”

“He is,” said Wenlock; “let him deny it if he can.”

Edmund, with a modest bow, replied, “It is true indeed I am a peasant,
and this honour is too great for me; I have only done my duty.”

The Duke of York, whose pride of birth equalled that of any man living
or dead, sheathed his sword immediately. “Though,” said he, “I cannot
reward you as I intended, I will take care that you shall have a large
share in the spoils of this night; and, I declare publicly, that you
stand first in the list of gallant men in this engagement.”

Thomas Hewson and his associates made a poor figure in their return;
they were publicly reproved for their backwardness. Hewson was wounded
in body and more in mind, for the bad success of his ill-laid design.
He could not hold up his head before Edmund; who, unconscious of their
malice, administered every kind of comfort to them. He spoke in their
behalf to the commanding officer, imputing their conduct to unavoidable
accidents. He visited them privately; he gave them a part of the spoils
allotted to himself; by every act of valour and courtesy he strove to
engage those hearts that hated, envied, and maligned him: But where
hatred arises from envy of superior qualities, every display of those
qualities increases the cause from whence it arises.


[Another pause ensues here.]


The young nobles and gentlemen who distinguished Edmund were prevented
from raising him to preferment by the insinuations of Wenlock and his
associates, who never failed to set before them his low descent, and his
pride and arrogance in presuming to rank with gentlemen.



[Here the manuscript is not legible for several pages. There is mention,
about this time, of the death of the Lady Fitz-Owen, but not the cause.]



Wenlock rejoiced to find that his schemes took effect, and that they
should be recalled at the approach of winter. The Baron was glad of
a pretence to send for them home; for he could no longer endure the
absence of his children, after the loss of their mother.


[The manuscript is again defaced for many leaves; at length the letters
become more legible, and the remainder of it is quite perfect.]



From the time the young men returned from France, the enemies of Edmund
employed their utmost abilities to ruin him in the Baron’s opinion, and
get him dismissed from the family. They insinuated a thousand things
against him, that happened, as they said, during his residence in
France, and therefore could not be known to his master; but when the
Baron privately enquired of his two elder sons, he found there was no
truth in their reports. Sir Robert, though he did not love him, scorned
to join in untruths against him. Mr. William spoke of him with the
warmth of fraternal affection. The Baron perceived that his kinsmen
disliked Edmund; but his own good heart hindered him from seeing the
baseness of theirs. It is said, that continual dropping will wear away a
stone; so did their incessant reports, by insensible degrees, produce a
coolness in his patron’s behaviour towards him. If he behaved with manly
spirit, it was misconstrued into pride and arrogance; his generosity
was imprudence; his humility was hypocrisy, the better to cover his
ambition. Edmund bore patiently all the indignities that were thrown
upon him; and, though he felt them severely in his bosom, scorned to
justify his conduct at the expence even of his enemies. Perhaps his
gentle spirit might at length have sunk under this treatment, but
providence interposed in his behalf; and, by seemingly accidental
circumstances, conducted him imperceptibly towards the crisis of his
fate.


Father Oswald, who had been preceptor to the young men, had a strong
affection for Edmund, from a thorough knowledge of his heart; he saw
through the mean artifices that were used to undermine him in his
patron’s favour; he watched their machinations, and strove to frustrate
their designs.


This good man used frequently to walk out with Edmund; they conversed
upon various subjects; and the youth would lament to him the unhappiness
of his situation, and the peculiar circumstances that attended him.
The father, by his wholesome advice, comforted his drooping heart,
and confirmed him in his resolution of bearing unavoidable evils with
patience and fortitude, from the consciousness of his own innocence, and
the assurance of a future and eternal reward.

One day, as they were walking in a wood near the castle, Edmund asked
the father, what meant those preparations for building, the cutting down
trees, and burning of bricks?

“What,” said Oswald, “have you not heard that my Lord is going to build
a new apartment on the west side of the castle?”

“And why,” said Edmund, “should my Lord be at that expence when there is
one on the east side that is never occupied?”

“That apartment,” said the friar, “you must have observed is always shut
up.”

“I have observed it often,” said Edmund; “but I never presumed to ask
any questions about it.”

“You had then,” said Oswald, “less curiosity, and more discretion, than
is common at your age.”

“You have raised my curiosity,” said Edmund; “and, if it be not
improper, I beg of you to gratify it.”

“We are alone,” said Oswald, “and I am so well assured of your prudence,
that I will explain this mystery in some degree to you.”

“You must know, that apartment was occupied by the last Lord Lovel when
he was a batchelor. He married in his father’s lifetime, who gave up his
own apartment to him, and offered to retire to this himself; but the son
would not permit him; he chose to sleep here, rather than in any other.
He had been married about three months, when his father, the old lord,
died of a fever. About twelve months after his marriage, he was called
upon to attend the King, Henry the Fourth, on an expedition into Wales,
whither he was attended by many of his dependants. He left his lady big
with child, and full of care and anxiety for his safety and return.

“After the King had chastised the rebels, and obtained the victory, the
Lord Lovel was expected home every day; various reports were sent home
before him; one messenger brought an account of his health and safety;
soon after another came with bad news, that he was slain in battle. His
kinsman, Sir Walter Lovel, came here on a visit to comfort the Lady; and
he waited to receive his kinsman at his return. It was he that brought
the news of the sad event of the battle to the Lady Lovel.

“She fainted away at the relation; but, when she revived, exerted the
utmost resolution; saying, it was her duty to bear this dreadful stroke
with Christian fortitude and patience, especially in regard to the
child she went with, the last remains of her beloved husband, and the
undoubted heir of a noble house. For several days she seemed an example
of patience and resignation; but then, all at once, she renounced them,
and broke out into passionate and frantic exclamations; she said, that
her dear lord was basely murdered; that his ghost had appeared to her,
and revealed his fate. She called upon Heaven and earth to revenge her
wrongs; saying, she would never cease complaining to God, and the King,
for vengeance and justice.

“Upon this, Sir Walter told the servants that Lady Lovel was distracted,
from grief for the death of her Lord; that his regard for her was as
strong as ever; and that, if she recovered, he would himself be her
comforter, and marry her. In the mean time she was confined in this very
apartment, and in less than a month the poor Lady died. She lies buried
in the family vault in St. Austin’s church in the village. Sir Walter
took possession of the castle, and all the other estates, and assumed
the title of Lord Lovel.

“Soon after, it was reported that the castle was haunted, and that the
ghosts of Lord and Lady Lovel had been seen by several of the servants.
Whoever went into this apartment were terrified by uncommon noises, and
strange appearances; at length this apartment was wholly shut up, and
the servants were forbid to enter it, or to talk of any thing relating
to it: However, the story did not stop here; it was whispered about,
that the new Lord Lovel was so disturbed every night, that he could
not sleep in quiet; and, being at last tired of the place, he sold
the castle and estate of his ancestors, to his brother-in-law the Lord
Fitz-Owen, who now enjoys it, and left this country.”

“All this is news to me,” said Edmund; “but, father, tell me what
grounds there were for the lady’s suspicion that her lord died
unfairly?”

“Alas!” said Oswald, “that is only known to God. There were strange
thoughts in the minds of many at that time; I had mine; but I will
not disclose them, not even to you. I will not injure those who may be
innocent; and I leave it to Providence, who will doubtless, in its own
best time and manner, punish the guilty. But let what I have told you be
as if you had never heard it.”

“I thank you for these marks of your esteem and confidence,” said
Edmund; “be assured that I will not abuse them; nor do I desire to
pry into secrets not proper to be revealed. I entirely approve your
discretion, and acquiesce in your conclusion, that Providence will in
its own time vindicate its ways to man; if it were not for that trust,
my situation would be insupportable. I strive earnestly to deserve the
esteem and favour of good men; I endeavour to regulate my conduct so as
to avoid giving offence to any man; but I see, with infinite pain, that
it is impossible for me to gain these points.”

“I see it too, with great concern,” said Oswald; “and every thing that I
can say and do in your favour is misconstrued; and, by seeking to do you
service, I lose my own influence. But I will never give my sanction to
acts of injustice, nor join to oppress innocence. My dear child, put
your trust in God: He who brought light out of darkness, can bring good
out of evil.”

“I hope and trust so,” said Edmund; “but, father, if my enemies should
prevail--if my lord should believe their stories against me, and I
should be put out of the house with disgrace, what will become of me?
I have nothing but my character to depend upon; if I lose that, I lose
every thing; and I see they seek no less than my ruin.”

“Trust in my lord’s honour and justice,” replied Oswald; “he knows your
virtue, and he is not ignorant of their ill-will towards you.”

“I know my lord’s justice too well to doubt it,” said Edmund; “but
would it not be better to rid him of this trouble, and his family of an
incumbrance? I would gladly do something for myself, but cannot without
my lord’s recommendation; and, such is my situation, that I fear the
asking for a dismission would be accounted base ingratitude; beside,
when I think of leaving this house, my heart saddens at the thought, and
tells me I cannot be happy out of it; yet I think I could return to a
peasant’s life with cheerfulness, rather than live in a palace under
disdain and contempt.”

“Have patience a little longer, my son,” said Oswald; “I will think
of some way to serve you, and to represent your grievances to my lord,
without offence to either--perhaps the causes may be removed. Continue
to observe the same irreproachable conduct; and be assured that Heaven
will defend your innocence, and defeat the unjust designs of your
enemies. Let us now return home.”

About a week after this conference, Edmund walked out in the fields
ruminating on the disagreeable circumstances of his situation.
Insensible of the time, he had been out several hours without perceiving
how the day wore away, when he heard himself called by name several
times; looking backward, he saw his friend Mr. William, and hallooed
to him. He came ru