.


Every reflection which Manfred made on the Friar’s behaviour, conspired
to persuade him that Jerome was privy to an amour between Isabella and
Theodore.  But Jerome’s new presumption, so dissonant from his former
meekness, suggested still deeper apprehensions.  The Prince even
suspected that the Friar depended on some secret support from Frederic,
whose arrival, coinciding with the novel appearance of Theodore, seemed
to bespeak a correspondence.  Still more was he troubled with the
resemblance of Theodore to Alfonso’s portrait.  The latter he knew had
unquestionably died without issue.  Frederic had consented to bestow
Isabella on him.  These contradictions agitated his mind with numberless
pangs.

He saw but two methods of extricating himself from his difficulties.  The
one was to resign his dominions to the Marquis—pride, ambition, and his
reliance on ancient prophecies, which had pointed out a possibility of
his preserving them to his posterity, combated that thought.  The other
was to press his marriage with Isabella.  After long ruminating on these
anxious thoughts, as he marched silently with Hippolita to the castle, he
at last discoursed with that Princess on the subject of his disquiet, and
used every insinuating and plausible argument to extract her consent to,
even her promise of promoting the divorce.  Hippolita needed little
persuasions to bend her to his pleasure.  She endeavoured to win him over
to the measure of resigning his dominions; but finding her exhortations
fruitless, she assured him, that as far as her conscience would allow,
she would raise no opposition to a separation, though without better
founded scruples than what he yet alleged, she would not engage to be
active in demanding it.

This compliance, though inadequate, was sufficient to raise Manfred’s
hopes.  He trusted that his power and wealth would easily advance his
suit at the court of Rome, whither he resolved to engage Frederic to take
a journey on purpose.  That Prince had discovered so much passion for
Matilda, that Manfred hoped to obtain all he wished by holding out or
withdrawing his daughter’s charms, according as the Marquis should appear
more or less disposed to co-operate in his views.  Even the absence of
Frederic would be a material point gained, until he could take further
measures for his security.

Dismissing Hippolita to her apartment, he repaired to that of the
Marquis; but crossing the great hall through which he was to pass he met
Bianca.  The damsel he knew was in the confidence of both the young
ladies.  It immediately occurred to him to sift her on the subject of
Isabella and Theodore.  Calling her aside into the recess of the oriel
window of the hall, and soothing her with many fair words and promises,
he demanded of her whether she knew aught of the state of Isabella’s
affections.

“I! my Lord! no my Lord—yes my Lord—poor Lady! she is wonderfully alarmed
about her father’s wounds; but I tell her he will do well; don’t your
Highness think so?”

“I do not ask you,” replied Manfred, “what she thinks about her father;
but you are in her secrets.  Come, be a good girl and tell me; is there
any young man—ha!—you understand me.”

“Lord bless me! understand your Highness? no, not I.  I told her a few
vulnerary herbs and repose—”

“I am not talking,” replied the Prince, impatiently, “about her father; I
know he will do well.”

“Bless me, I rejoice to hear your Highness say so; for though I thought
it not right to let my young Lady despond, methought his greatness had a
wan look, and a something—I remember when young Ferdinand was wounded by
the Venetian—”

“Thou answerest from the point,” interrupted Manfred; “but here, take
this jewel, perhaps that may fix thy attention—nay, no reverences; my
favour shall not stop here—come, tell me truly; how stands Isabella’s
heart?”

“Well! your Highness has such a way!” said Bianca, “to be sure—but can
your Highness keep a secret? if it should ever come out of your lips—”

“It shall not, it shall not,” cried Manfred.

“Nay, but swear, your Highness.”

“By my halidame, if it should ever be known that I said it—”

“Why, truth is truth, I do not think my Lady Isabella ever much
affectioned my young Lord your son; yet he was a sweet youth as one
should see; I am sure, if I had been a Princess—but bless me!  I must
attend my Lady Matilda; she will marvel what is become of me.”

“Stay,” cried Manfred; “thou hast not satisfied my question.  Hast thou
ever carried any message, any letter?”

“I! good gracious!” cried Bianca; “I carry a letter?  I would not to be a
Queen.  I hope your Highness thinks, though I am poor, I am honest.  Did
your Highness never hear what Count Marsigli offered me, when he came a
wooing to my Lady Matilda?”

“I have not leisure,” said Manfred, “to listen to thy tale.  I do not
question thy honesty.  But it is thy duty to conceal nothing from me.
How long has Isabella been acquainted with Theodore?”

“Nay, there is nothing can escape your Highness!” said Bianca; “not that
I know any thing of the matter.  Theodore, to be sure, is a proper young
man, and, as my Lady Matilda says, the very image of good Alfonso.  Has
not your Highness remarked it?”

“Yes, yes,—No—thou torturest me,” said Manfred.  “Where did they meet?
when?”

“Who! my Lady Matilda?” said Bianca.

“No, no, not Matilda: Isabella; when did Isabella first become acquainted
with this Theodore!”

“Virgin Mary!” said Bianca, “how should I know?”

“Thou dost know,” said Manfred; “and I must know; I will—”

“Lord! your Highness is not jealous of young Theodore!” said Bianca.

“Jealous! no, no.  Why should I be jealous? perhaps I mean to unite
them—If I were sure Isabella would have no repugnance.”

“Repugnance! no, I’ll warrant her,” said Bianca; “he is as comely a youth
as ever trod on Christian ground.  We are all in love with him; there is
not a soul in the castle but would be rejoiced to have him for our
Prince—I mean, when it shall please heaven to call your Highness to
itself.”

“Indeed!” said Manfred, “has it gone so far! oh! this cursed Friar!—but I
must not lose time—go, Bianca, attend Isabella; but I charge thee, not a
word of what has passed.  Find out how she is affected towards Theodore;
bring me good news, and that ring has a companion.  Wait at the foot of
the winding staircase: I am going to visit the Marquis, and will talk
further with thee at my return.”

Manfred, after some general conversation, desired Frederic to dismiss the
two Knights, his companions, having to talk with him on urgent affairs.

As soon as they were alone, he began in artful guise to sound the Marquis
on the subject of Matilda; and finding him disposed to his wish, he let
drop hints on the difficulties that would attend the celebration of their
marriage, unless—At that instant Bianca burst into the room with a
wildness in her look and gestures that spoke the utmost terror.

“Oh! my Lord, my Lord!” cried she; “we are all undone! it is come again!
it is come again!”

“What is come again?” cried Manfred amazed.

“Oh! the hand! the Giant! the hand!—support me! I am terrified out of my
senses,” cried Bianca.  “I will not sleep in the castle to-night.  Where
shall I go? my things may come after me to-morrow—would I had been
content to wed Francesco! this comes of ambition!”

“What has terrified thee thus, young woman?” said the Marquis.  “Thou art
safe here; be not alarmed.”

“Oh! your Greatness is wonderfully good,” said Bianca, “but I dare
not—no, pray let me go—I had rather leave everything behind me, than stay
another hour under this roof.”

“Go to, thou hast lost thy senses,” said Manfred.  “Interrupt us not; we
were communing on important matters—My Lord, this wench is subject to
fits—Come with me, Bianca.”

“Oh! the Saints!  No,” said Bianca, “for certain it comes to warn your
Highness; why should it appear to me else?  I say my prayers morning and
evening—oh! if your Highness had believed Diego!  ’Tis the same hand that
he saw the foot to in the gallery-chamber—Father Jerome has often told us
the prophecy would be out one of these days—‘Bianca,’ said he, ‘mark my
words—’”

“Thou ravest,” said Manfred, in a rage; “be gone, and keep these
fooleries to frighten thy companions.”

“What! my Lord,” cried Bianca, “do you think I have seen nothing? go to
the foot of the great stairs yourself—as I live I saw it.”

“Saw what? tell us, fair maid, what thou hast seen,” said Frederic.

“Can your Highness listen,” said Manfred, “to the delirium of a silly
wench, who has heard stories of apparitions until she believes them?”

“This is more than fancy,” said the Marquis; “her terror is too natural
and too strongly impressed to be the work of imagination.  Tell us, fair
maiden, what it is has moved thee thus?”

“Yes, my Lord, thank your Greatness,” said Bianca; “I believe I look very
pale; I shall be better when I have recovered myself—I was going to my
Lady Isabella’s chamber, by his Highness’s order—”

“We do not want the circumstances,” interrupted Manfred.  “Since his
Highness will have it so, proceed; but be brief.”

“Lord! your Highness thwarts one so!” replied Bianca; “I fear my hair—I
am sure I never in my life—well! as I was telling your Greatness, I was
going by his Highness’s order to my Lady Isabella’s chamber; she lies in
the watchet-coloured chamber, on the right hand, one pair of stairs: so
when I came to the great stairs—I was looking on his Highness’s present
here—”

“Grant me patience!” said Manfred, “will this wench never come to the
point? what imports it to the Marquis, that I gave thee a bauble for thy
faithful attendance on my daughter? we want to know what thou sawest.”

“I was going to tell your Highness,” said Bianca, “if you would permit
me.  So as I was rubbing the ring—I am sure I had not gone up three
steps, but I heard the rattling of armour; for all the world such a
clatter as Diego says he heard when the Giant turned him about in the
gallery-chamber.”

“What Giant is this, my Lord?” said the Marquis; “is your castle haunted
by giants and goblins?”

“Lord! what, has not your Greatness heard the story of the Giant in the
gallery-chamber?” cried Bianca.  “I marvel his Highness has not told you;
mayhap you do not know there is a prophecy—”

“This trifling is intolerable,” interrupted Manfred.  “Let us dismiss
this silly wench, my Lord! we have more important affairs to discuss.”

“By your favour,” said Frederic, “these are no trifles.  The enormous
sabre I was directed to in the wood, yon casque, its fellow—are these
visions of this poor maiden’s brain?”

“So Jaquez thinks, may it please your Greatness,” said Bianca.  “He says
this moon will not be out without our seeing some strange revolution.
For my part, I should not be surprised if it was to happen to-morrow;
for, as I was saying, when I heard the clattering of armour, I was all in
a cold sweat.  I looked up, and, if your Greatness will believe me, I saw
upon the uppermost banister of the great stairs a hand in armour as big
as big.  I thought I should have swooned.  I never stopped until I came
hither—would I were well out of this castle.  My Lady Matilda told me but
yester-morning that her Highness Hippolita knows something.”

“Thou art an insolent!” cried Manfred.  “Lord Marquis, it much misgives
me that this scene is concerted to affront me.  Are my own domestics
suborned to spread tales injurious to my honour?  Pursue your claim by
manly daring; or let us bury our feuds, as was proposed, by the
intermarriage of our children.  But trust me, it ill becomes a Prince of
your bearing to practise on mercenary wenches.”

“I scorn your imputation,” said Frederic.  “Until this hour I never set
eyes on this damsel: I have given her no jewel.  My Lord, my Lord, your
conscience, your guilt accuses you, and would throw the suspicion on me;
but keep your daughter, and think no more of Isabella.  The judgments
already fallen on your house forbid me matching into it.”

Manfred, alarmed at the resolute tone in which Frederic delivered these
words, endeavoured to pacify him.  Dismissing Bianca, he made such
submissions to the Marquis, and threw in such artful encomiums on
Matilda, that Frederic was once more staggered.  However, as his passion
was of so recent a date, it could not at once surmount the scruples he
had conceived.  He had gathered enough from Bianca’s discourse to
persuade him that heaven declared itself against Manfred.  The proposed
marriages too removed his claim to a distance; and the principality of
Otranto was a stronger temptation than the contingent reversion of it
with Matilda.  Still he would not absolutely recede from his engagements;
but purposing to gain time, he demanded of Manfred if it was true in fact
that Hippolita consented to the divorce.  The Prince, transported to find
no other obstacle, and depending on his influence over his wife, assured
the Marquis it was so, and that he might satisfy himself of the truth
from her own mouth.

As they were thus discoursing, word was brought that the banquet was
prepared.  Manfred conducted Frederic to the great hall, where they were
received by Hippolita and the young Princesses.  Manfred placed the
Marquis next to Matilda, and seated himself between his wife and
Isabella.  Hippolita comported herself with an easy gravity; but the
young ladies were silent and melancholy.  Manfred, who was determined to
pursue his point with the Marquis in the remainder of the evening, pushed
on the feast until it waxed late; affecting unrestrained gaiety, and
plying Frederic with repeated goblets of wine.  The latter, more upon his
guard than Manfred wished, declined his frequent challenges, on pretence
of his late loss of blood; while the Prince, to raise his own disordered
spirits, and to counterfeit unconcern, indulged himself in plentiful
draughts, though not to the intoxication of his senses.

The evening being far advanced, the banquet concluded.  Manfred would
have withdrawn with Frederic; but the latter pleading weakness and want
of repose, retired to his chamber, gallantly telling the Prince that his
daughter should amuse his Highness until himself could attend him.
Manfred accepted the party, and to the no small grief of Isabella,
accompanied her to her apartment.  Matilda waited on her mother to enjoy
the freshness of the evening on the ramparts of the castle.

Soon as the company were dispersed their several ways, Frederic, quitting
his chamber, inquired if Hippolita was alone, and was told by one of her
attendants, who had not noticed her going forth, that at that hour she
generally withdrew to her oratory, where he probably would find her.  The
Marquis, during the repast, had beheld Matilda with increase of passion.
He now wished to find Hippolita in the disposition her Lord had promised.
The portents that had alarmed him were forgotten in his desires.
Stealing softly and unobserved to the apartment of Hippolita, he entered
it with a resolution to encourage her acquiescence to the divorce, having
perceived that Manfred was resolved to make the possession of Isabella an
unalterable condition, before he would grant Matilda to his wishes.

The Marquis was not surprised at the silence that reigned in the
Princess’s apartment.  Concluding her, as he had been advertised, in her
oratory, he passed on.  The door was ajar; the evening gloomy and
overcast.  Pushing open the door gently, he saw a person kneeling before
the altar.  As he approached nearer, it seemed not a woman, but one in a
long woollen weed, whose back was towards him.  The person seemed
absorbed in prayer.  The Marquis was about to return, when the figure,
rising, stood some moments fixed in meditation, without regarding him.
The Marquis, expecting the holy person to come forth, and meaning to
excuse his uncivil interruption, said,

“Reverend Father, I sought the Lady Hippolita.”

“Hippolita!” replied a hollow voice; “camest thou to this castle to seek
Hippolita?” and then the figure, turning slowly round, discovered to
Frederic the fleshless jaws and empty sockets of a skeleton, wrapt in a
hermit’s cowl.

“Angels of grace protect me!” cried Frederic, recoiling.

“Deserve their protection!” said the Spectre.  Frederic, falling on his
knees, adjured the phantom to take pity on him.

“Dost thou not remember me?” said the apparition.  “Remember the wood of
Joppa!”

“Art thou that holy hermit?” cried Frederic, trembling.  “Can I do aught
for thy eternal peace?”

“Wast thou delivered from bondage,” said the spectre, “to pursue carnal
delights?  Hast thou forgotten the buried sabre, and the behest of Heaven
engraven on it?”

“I have not, I have not,” said Frederic; “but say, blest spirit, what is
thy errand to me?  What remains to be done?”

“To forget Matilda!” said the apparition; and vanished.

Frederic’s blood froze in his veins.  For some minutes he remained
motionless.  Then falling prostrate on his face before the altar, he
besought the intercession of every saint for pardon.  A flood of tears
succeeded to this transport; and the image of the beauteous Matilda
rushing in spite of him on his thoughts, he lay on the ground in a
conflict of penitence and passion.  Ere he could recover from this agony
of his spirits, the Princess Hippolita with a taper in her hand entered
the oratory alone.  Seeing a man without motion on the floor, she gave a
shriek, concluding him dead.  Her fright brought Frederic to himself.
Rising suddenly, his face bedewed with tears, he would have rushed from
her presence; but Hippolita stopping him, conjured him in the most
plaintive accents to explain the cause of his disorder, and by what
strange chance she had found him there in that posture.

“Ah, virtuous Princess!” said the Marquis, penetrated with grief, and
stopped.

“For the love of Heaven, my Lord,” said Hippolita, “disclose the cause of
this transport!  What mean these doleful sounds, this alarming
exclamation on my name?  What woes has heaven still in store for the
wretched Hippolita?  Yet silent!  By every pitying angel, I adjure thee,
noble Prince,” continued she, falling at his feet, “to disclose the
purport of what lies at thy heart.  I see thou feelest for me; thou
feelest the sharp pangs that thou inflictest—speak, for pity!  Does aught
thou knowest concern my child?”

“I cannot speak,” cried Frederic, bursting from her.  “Oh, Matilda!”

Quitting the Princess thus abruptly, he hastened to his own apartment.
At the door of it he was accosted by Manfred, who flushed by wine and
love had come to seek him, and to propose to waste some hours of the
night in music and revelling.  Frederic, offended at an invitation so
dissonant from the mood of his soul, pushed him rudely aside, and
entering his chamber, flung the door intemperately against Manfred, and
bolted it inwards.  The haughty Prince, enraged at this unaccountable
behaviour, withdrew in a frame of mind capable of the most fatal
excesses.  As he crossed the court, he was met by the domestic whom he
had planted at the convent as a spy on Jerome and Theodore.  This man,
almost breathless with the haste he had made, informed his Lord that
Theodore, and some lady from the castle were, at that instant, in private
conference at the tomb of Alfonso in St. Nicholas’s church.  He had
dogged Theodore thither, but the gloominess of the night had prevented
his discovering who the woman was.

Manfred, whose spirits were inflamed, and whom Isabella had driven from
her on his urging his passion with too little reserve, did not doubt but
the inquietude she had expressed had been occasioned by her impatience to
meet Theodore.  Provoked by this conjecture, and enraged at her father,
he hastened secretly to the great church.  Gliding softly between the
aisles, and guided by an imperfect gleam of moonshine that shone faintly
through the illuminated windows, he stole towards the tomb of Alfonso, to
which he was directed by indistinct whispers of the persons he sought.
The first sounds he could distinguish were—

“Does it, alas! depend on me?  Manfred will never permit our union.”

“No, this shall prevent it!” cried the tyrant, drawing his dagger, and
plunging it over her shoulder into the bosom of the person that spoke.

“Ah, me, I am slain!” cried Matilda, sinking.  “Good heaven, receive my
soul!”

“Savage, inhuman monster, what hast thou done!” cried Theodore, rushing
on him, and wrenching his dagger from him.

“Stop, stop thy impious hand!” cried Matilda; “it is my father!”

Manfred, waking as from a trance, beat his breast, twisted his hands in
his locks, and endeavoured to recover his dagger from Theodore to
despatch himself.  Theodore, scarce less distracted, and only mastering
the transports of his grief to assist Matilda, had now by his cries drawn
some of the monks to his aid.  While part of them endeavoured, in concert
with the afflicted Theodore, to stop the blood of the dying Princess, the
rest prevented Manfred from laying violent hands on himself.

Matilda, resigning herself patiently to her fate, acknowledged with looks
of grateful love the zeal of Theodore.  Yet oft as her faintness would
permit her speech its way, she begged the assistants to comfort her
father.  Jerome, by this time, had learnt the fatal news, and reached the
church.  His looks seemed to reproach Theodore, but turning to Manfred,
he said,

“Now, tyrant! behold the completion of woe fulfilled on thy impious and
devoted head!  The blood of Alfonso cried to heaven for vengeance; and
heaven has permitted its altar to be polluted by assassination, that thou
mightest shed thy own blood at the foot of that Prince’s sepulchre!”

“Cruel man!” cried Matilda, “to aggravate the woes of a parent; may
heaven bless my father, and forgive him as I do!  My Lord, my gracious
Sire, dost thou forgive thy child?  Indeed, I came not hither to meet
Theodore.  I found him praying at this tomb, whither my mother sent me to
intercede for thee, for her—dearest father, bless your child, and say you
forgive her.”

“Forgive thee!  Murderous monster!” cried Manfred, “can assassins
forgive?  I took thee for Isabella; but heaven directed my bloody hand to
the heart of my child.  Oh, Matilda!—I cannot utter it—canst thou forgive
the blindness of my rage?”

“I can, I do; and may heaven confirm it!” said Matilda; “but while I have
life to ask it—oh! my mother! what will she feel?  Will you comfort her,
my Lord?  Will you not put her away?  Indeed she loves you!  Oh, I am
faint! bear me to the castle.  Can I live to have her close my eyes?”

Theodore and the monks besought her earnestly to suffer herself to be
borne into the convent; but her instances were so pressing to be carried
to the castle, that placing her on a litter, they conveyed her thither as
she requested.  Theodore, supporting her head with his arm, and hanging
over her in an agony of despairing love, still endeavoured to inspire her
with hopes of life.  Jerome, on the other side, comforted her with
discourses of heaven, and holding a crucifix before her, which she bathed
with innocent tears, prepared her for her passage to immortality.
Manfred, plunged in the deepest affliction, followed the litter in
despair.

Ere they reached the castle, Hippolita, informed of the dreadful
catastrophe, had flown to meet her murdered child; but when she saw the
afflicted procession, the mightiness of her grief deprived her of her
senses, and she fell lifeless to the earth in a swoon.  Isabella and
Frederic, who attended her, were overwhelmed in almost equal sorrow.
Matilda alone seemed insensible to her own situation: every thought was
lost in tenderness for her mother.

Ordering the litter to stop, as soon as Hippolita was brought to herself,
she asked for her father.  He approached, unable to speak.  Matilda,
seizing his hand and her mother’s, locked them in her own, and then
clasped them to her heart.  Manfred could not support this act of
pathetic piety.  He dashed himself on the ground, and cursed the day he
was born.  Isabella, apprehensive that these struggles of passion were
more than Matilda could support, took upon herself to order Manfred to be
borne to his apartment, while she caused Matilda to be conveyed to the
nearest chamber.  Hippolita, scarce more alive than her daughter, was
regardless of everything but her; but when the tender Isabella’s care
would have likewise removed her, while the surgeons examined Matilda’s
wound, she cried,

“Remove me! never, never!  I lived but in her, and will expire with her.”

Matilda raised her eyes at her mother’s voice, but closed them again
without speaking.  Her sinking pulse and the damp coldness of her hand
soon dispelled all hopes of recovery.  Theodore followed the surgeons
into the outer chamber, and heard them pronounce the fatal sentence with
a transport equal to frenzy.

“Since she cannot live mine,” cried he, “at least she shall be mine in
death!  Father!  Jerome! will you not join our hands?” cried he to the
Friar, who, with the Marquis, had accompanied the surgeons.

“What means thy distracted rashness?” said Jerome.  “Is this an hour for
marriage?”

“It is, it is,” cried Theodore.  “Alas! there is no other!”

“Young man, thou art too unadvised,” said Frederic.  “Dost thou think we
are to listen to thy fond transports in this hour of fate?  What
pretensions hast thou to the Princess?”

“Those of a Prince,” said Theodore; “of the sovereign of Otranto.  This
reverend man, my father, has informed me who I am.”

“Thou ravest,” said the Marquis.  “There is no Prince of Otranto but
myself, now Manfred, by murder, by sacrilegious murder, has forfeited all
pretensions.”

“My Lord,” said Jerome, assuming an air of command, “he tells you true.
It was not my purpose the secret should have been divulged so soon, but
fate presses onward to its work.  What his hot-headed passion has
revealed, my tongue confirms.  Know, Prince, that when Alfonso set sail
for the Holy Land—”

“Is this a season for explanations?” cried Theodore.  “Father, come and
unite me to the Princess; she shall be mine!  In every other thing I will
dutifully obey you.  My life! my adored Matilda!” continued Theodore,
rushing back into the inner chamber, “will you not be mine?  Will you not
bless your—”

Isabella made signs to him to be silent, apprehending the Princess was
near her end.

“What, is she dead?” cried Theodore; “is it possible!”

The violence of his exclamations brought Matilda to herself.  Lifting up
her eyes, she looked round for her mother.

“Life of my soul, I am here!” cried Hippolita; “think not I will quit
thee!”

“Oh! you are too good,” said Matilda.  “But weep not for me, my mother!
I am going where sorrow never dwells—Isabella, thou hast loved me;
wouldst thou not supply my fondness to this dear, dear woman?  Indeed I
am faint!”

“Oh! my child! my child!” said Hippolita in a flood of tears, “can I not
withhold thee a moment?”

“It will not be,” said Matilda; “commend me to heaven—Where is my father?
forgive him, dearest mother—forgive him my death; it was an error.  Oh!
I had forgotten—dearest mother, I vowed never to see Theodore
more—perhaps that has drawn down this calamity—but it was not
intentional—can you pardon me?”

“Oh! wound not my agonising soul!” said Hippolita; “thou never couldst
offend me—Alas! she faints! help! help!”

“I would say something more,” said Matilda, struggling, “but it cannot
be—Isabella—Theodore—for my sake—Oh!—” she expired.

Isabella and her women tore Hippolita from the corse; but Theodore
threatened destruction to all who attempted to remove him from it.  He
printed a thousand kisses on her clay-cold hands, and uttered every
expression that despairing love could dictate.

Isabella, in the meantime, was accompanying the afflicted Hippolita to
her apartment; but, in the middle of the court, they were met by Manfred,
who, distracted with his own thoughts, and anxious once more to behold
his daughter, was advancing to the chamber where she lay.  As the moon
was now at its height, he read in the countenances of this unhappy
company the event he dreaded.

“What! is she dead?” cried he in wild confusion.  A clap of thunder at
that instant shook the castle to its foundations; the earth rocked, and
the clank of more than mortal armour was heard behind.  Frederic and
Jerome thought the last day was at hand.  The latter, forcing Theodore
along with them, rushed into the court.  The moment Theodore appeared,
the walls of the castle behind Manfred were thrown down with a mighty
force, and the form of Alfonso, dilated to an immense magnitude, appeared
in the centre of the ruins.

“Behold in Theodore the true heir of Alfonso!” said the vision: And
having pronounced those words, accompanied by a clap of thunder, it
ascended solemnly towards heaven, where the clouds parting asunder, the
form of St. Nicholas was seen, and receiving Alfonso’s shade, they were
soon wrapt from mortal eyes in a blaze of glory.

The beholders fell prostrate on their faces, acknowledging the divine
will.  The first that broke silence was Hippolita.

“My Lord,” said she to the desponding Manfred, “behold the vanity of
human greatness!  Conrad is gone!  Matilda is no more!  In Theodore we
view the true Prince of Otranto.  By what miracle he is so I know
not—suffice it to us, our doom is pronounced! shall we not, can we but
dedicate the few deplorable hours we have to live, in deprecating the
further wrath of heaven? heaven ejects us—whither can we fly, but to yon
holy cells that yet offer us a retreat.”

“Thou guiltless but unhappy woman! unhappy by my crimes!” replied
Manfred, “my heart at last is open to thy devout admonitions.  Oh!
could—but it cannot be—ye are lost in wonder—let me at last do justice on
myself!  To heap shame on my own head is all the satisfaction I have left
to offer to offended heaven.  My story has drawn down these judgments:
Let my confession atone—but, ah! what can atone for usurpation and a
murdered child? a child murdered in a consecrated place?  List, sirs, and
may this bloody record be a warning to future tyrants!”

“Alfonso, ye all know, died in the Holy Land—ye would interrupt me; ye
would say he came not fairly to his end—it is most true—why else this
bitter cup which Manfred must drink to the dregs.  Ricardo, my
grandfather, was his chamberlain—I would draw a veil over my ancestor’s
crimes—but it is in vain!  Alfonso died by poison.  A fictitious will
declared Ricardo his heir.  His crimes pursued him—yet he lost no Conrad,
no Matilda!  I pay the price of usurpation for all!  A storm overtook
him.  Haunted by his guilt he vowed to St. Nicholas to found a church and
two convents, if he lived to reach Otranto.  The sacrifice was accepted:
the saint appeared to him in a dream, and promised that Ricardo’s
posterity should reign in Otranto until the rightful owner should be
grown too large to inhabit the castle, and as long as issue male from
Ricardo’s loins should remain to enjoy it—alas! alas! nor male nor
female, except myself, remains of all his wretched race!  I have done—the
woes of these three days speak the rest.  How this young man can be
Alfonso’s heir I know not—yet I do not doubt it.  His are these
dominions; I resign them—yet I knew not Alfonso had an heir—I question
not the will of heaven—poverty and prayer must fill up the woeful space,
until Manfred shall be summoned to Ricardo.”

“What remains is my part to declare,” said Jerome.  “When Alfonso set
sail for the Holy Land he was driven by a storm to the coast of Sicily.
The other vessel, which bore Ricardo and his train, as your Lordship must
have heard, was separated from him.”

“It is most true,” said Manfred; “and the title you give me is more than
an outcast can claim—well! be it so—proceed.”

Jerome blushed, and continued.  “For three months Lord Alfonso was
wind-bound in Sicily.  There he became enamoured of a fair virgin named
Victoria.  He was too pious to tempt her to forbidden pleasures.  They
were married.  Yet deeming this amour incongruous with the holy vow of
arms by which he was bound, he determined to conceal their nuptials until
his return from the Crusade, when he purposed to seek and acknowledge her
for his lawful wife.  He left her pregnant.  During his absence she was
delivered of a daughter.  But scarce had she felt a mother’s pangs ere
she heard the fatal rumour of her Lord’s death, and the succession of
Ricardo.  What could a friendless, helpless woman do?  Would her
testimony avail?—yet, my lord, I have an authentic writing—”

“It needs not,” said Manfred; “the horrors of these days, the vision we
have but now seen, all corroborate thy evidence beyond a thousand
parchments.  Matilda’s death and my expulsion—”

“Be composed, my Lord,” said Hippolita; “this holy man did not mean to
recall your griefs.”  Jerome proceeded.

“I shall not dwell on what is needless.  The daughter of which Victoria
was delivered, was at her maturity bestowed in marriage on me.  Victoria
died; and the secret remained locked in my breast.  Theodore’s narrative
has told the rest.”

The Friar ceased.  The disconsolate company retired to the remaining part
of the castle.  In the morning Manfred signed his abdication of the
principality, with the approbation of Hippolita, and each took on them
the habit of religion in the neighbouring convents.  Frederic offered his
daughter to the new Prince, which Hippolita’s tenderness for Isabella
concurred to promote.  But Theodore’s grief was too fresh to admit the
thought of another love; and it was not until after frequent discourses
with Isabella of his dear Matilda, that he was persuaded he could know no
happiness but in the society of one with whom he could for ever indulge
the melancholy that had taken possession of his soul.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO***


******* This file should be named 696-0.txt or 696-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/9/696



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.